      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

                                                            Chapter 8

 Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

                                    Martin Mittring14

                                             Crytek GmbH

Figure 1. A screenshot from the award-winning Far Cry game, which represented "next
gen" at the time of its release

             Figure 2. A screenshot from the upcoming game Crysis from Crytek

14 email: martin@crytek.de
                                                               97
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

8.1 Abstract

In this chapter we do not present one specific algorithm; instead we try to describe the
approaches the German company named Crytek took to find certain rendering
algorithms that work well together. We believe this information is valuable for anyone
that wants to implement similar rendering algorithms because often the implementation
challenges arise when combining with other algorithms. We will also describe briefly the
path to it as that covers alternative approaches you also might want to consider. This is
not a complete description of everything that was done on the rendering side because
for this chapter we picked certain areas that are of interest specifically for this audience
and limited ourselves to a presentable extend.
The work presented here takes significant advantage of research done by the graphics
community in recent years and combines it with novel ideas developed within Crytek to
realize implementations that efficiently map onto graphics hardware.

8.2 Introduction

Crytek Studios developed a technically outstanding Far Cry first person shooter game
and it was an instant success upon its release. Far Cry raised the bar for all games of its
genre. After our company shipped Far Cry1, one convenient possibility was to develop a
sequel using the existing engine with little modifications - more or less the same engine
we used for Far Cry. While this could have been an easy and lucrative decision, we
believed that it would prove to be limiting for our goals ­ technically and artistically. We
made the decision that we want to develop a new next-generation engine and improve
the design and architecture, along with adding many new features. The new game,
named Crysis2, would follow Far Cry with the same genre, but would tremendously
increase in scope ­ everything had to be bigger and better. The new engine, the
CryEngine 2, would make that possible.
After reading the design document and an intense deliberation session amongst all
designers, programmers and artists, we arrived at a set of goals for the new engine to
solve:

1 Shipped March 2003, Publisher: Ubisoft, Platform: PC
2 Not released yet, Publisher: Electronic Arts, Platform: PC

                                                               98
   Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

·  The game would contain three different environments

                              Many objects, height map, ocean, big
                              view distance, ambient lighting with one
                              main directional light source

   Figure 3. Jungle paradise

                              Many point lights, dark, huge room like
                              sections, geometry occlusion, fog
                              volumes

   Figure 4. Alien indoor
   environment

                              Ice Material layer, subsurface scattering

        Figure 5. Ice environment

Achieving all three environments is a challenge as it's hard to optimize for levels with
completely different characteristics.

    · Cinematographic quality rendering without hitting the Uncanny Valley
         The closer you get to movies quality, the less forgiving the audience will be.

    · Dynamic light and shadows
          Pre-computing lighting is crucial to many algorithms that improve performance
          and quality. Having dynamic light and shadows prevents us from using most of
          those algorithms because they often rely on static properties.

    · Support for multiple GPU and multiple CPU (MGPU & MCPU)
          Development with multithreading and multiple graphic cards is much more
          complex and often it's hard to not scarify other configurations.

                                                               99
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

    · Game design requested a 21km×21km game play area

          We considered doing this; but production, streaming, world persistence would

         not be worth the effort. We ended up having multiple levels with up to 4km×4km.

    · Target GPU from shader model 2.0 to 4.0 (DirectX10)
          Starting with Shader Model 2.0 was quite convenient but DirectX10®
          development with early hardware and early drivers often slowed us down.

    · High Dynamic Range
          We had good results with HDR in Far Cry, and for the realistic look we wanted to
          develop the game without the LDR limitations.

    · Dynamic environment (breakable)
          This turned out to be one of the coolest features but it wasn't easy to achieve.

    · Developing game and engine together
          That forced us to have the code always in some usable state. That's simple for a
          small project but becomes a challenge when doing on a large scale.

Our concept artists created many concept images in order to define the game's initial
look but in order to ultimately define the feel of the game we produced a video. The
external company Blur3 studio produced with our input a few concept videos for us and
that helped to come to consent on the look and feel we wanted to achieve.

Figure 6. A frame from one of the concept videos from Blur (rendered off-line) for
Crysis.

8.3 Overview

In the remainder of this chapter we will first discuss the shader framework used by the
new CryEngine 2. This area turned out to be a significant challenge for our large scale
production. Then we will describe our solutions for direct and indirect lighting (including
some of our design decisions). We can use specialized algorithms by isolating particular

3 http://www.blur.com

                                                              100
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

lighting approach into a contained problem and solving it in the most efficient way. In that
context, we approach direct lighting primarily from the point of view of shadowing (since
shading can be done quite easily with shaders of varied sophistication). Indirect lighting
can be approximated by ambient occlusion, a simple darkening of the ambient shading
contribution. Finally we cover various algorithms that solve the level of detail problem. Of
course this chapter will only cover but a few rendering aspects of our engine and many
topics will be left uncovered ­ but it should give a good "taste" of the complexity of our
system and allow us to dig in into a few select areas in sufficient details.

8.4 Shaders and Shading

8.4.1 Historical Perspective on CryEngine 1

In Far Cry we supported graphics hardware down to NVIDIA GeForce 2 which means
we not only had pixel and vertex shader but also fixed function transform and lighting
(T&L) and register combiner (pre pixel shader solution to blend textures) support.
Because of that and to support complex materials for DirectX and OpenGL our shader
scripts had complex syntax.

After Far Cry we wanted to improve that and refactored the system. We removed fixed
function support and made the syntax more FX-like as described in [Microsoft07].

Very late in the project our renderer programmer introduced a new render path that was
based on some über-shader approach. That was basically one pixel shader and vertex
shader written in CG/HLSL with a lot of #ifdef. That turned out to be much simpler and
faster for development as we completely avoided the hand optimization step. The early
shader compilers were not always able to create shaders as optimal as humans could
do but it was a good solution for shader model 2.0 graphics cards.

The über-shader had so many variations that compiling all of them was simply not
possible. We accepted a noticeable stall due to compilation during development (when
shader compilation was necessary) but we wanted to ship the game with a shader cache
that had all shaders precompiled. We ended up playing the game on NVIDIA and on ATI
till the cache wasn't getting new entries. We shipped Far Cry with that but clearly that
wasn't a good solution and we had to improve that. We describe a lot more details about
our first engine in [Wenzel05].

8.4.2 CryEngine 2

We decided to reduce a number of requirements for cleaner engine. As a result we
removed support for OpenGL and fixed function pipeline support. This allowed us to
make the shader scripts more FX format compatible. Then developing shaders became
much more convenient and simple to learn.

                                                              101
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

We still had the problem with too many shader combinations and wanted to solve that.
We changed the system by creating a shader cache request list. That list was gathered
from all computers in the company over the network and it was used during the nightly
shader cache compilation. However compilation time was long so we constantly had to
reduce the amount of combinations.

We had the following options:

    · Dynamic branching

    · Reducing combinations and accepting less functionality

    · Reducing combinations and accepting less performance

    · Separating into multiple passes

We did that in multiple iterations and together with a distributed shader compilation we
managed to compile all shaders for a build in about an hour.

8.4.3 3DcTM for Normal Maps

The 3DcTM texture format introduced by ATI [ATI04] allows compressing normal maps in
one byte per texel with good quality and only little extra shader cost (reconstructing the z
component). Uncompressed normal maps cost 4 bytes per texel (XYZ stored in RGB,
one byte usually wasted for padding). In our new engine we decided to not do texture
compression at load time. Textures become processed by our resource compiler tool
and there we generate the mip levels and apply the compression. This way we get
smaller builds and faster loading. For hardware that doesn't allow 3DcTM compression
we convert the 3DcTM to DXT5 at load time. The formats are quite similar and conversion
is simple. The minor quality loss is acceptable for low spec. Older NVIDIA cards have
3DcTM emulation in the drivers so we don't have to take care of that (appears without
visible quality loss, however, with this solution requires 2 byte per texel storage).

8.4.4 Per-Pixel Scene Depth

Using an early z pass can reduce per pixel shading cost because many pixel can be
rejected based on the z value before a pixel shader needs to be executed. From
beginning on we based our rendering on early z because we expected heavy pixel
shader usage. For that we have to accept a higher draw call count. For many effects the
depth value would be useful. As it wasn't possible to bind the z buffer we decided to
output that value to a texture. At first we used the R16G16 texture format as this was
available on all hardware and the 16 bit float quality was sufficient. Initially we had some
use for the second channel but later we optimized that away. On ATI R16 was an option
and to save some memory and bandwidth we used that format. We realized on some
hardware the R16G16 is actually slower than the R32 format so we used R32 when R16
was not available. An even better option is using the z buffer directly as we don't need

                                                              102
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

extra memory and the early z pass can run faster (double speed without color write on
some hardware). So we ended up using R16, R32 or even native z buffer ­ depending
on what is available.

The depth value allows some tricks known from deferred shading. With one MAD
operation and a 3 component interpolator it's possible to reconstruct the world space
position. However for floating point precision it's better to reconstruct positions relative to
the camera position or some point near to it. That is especially important when using
24bit or 16bit float in the pixel shader. By offsetting all objects and lights it's possible
move the 0, 0, 0 origin near the viewer. Without doing this decals and animations can
flicker and jump. We used the scene depth for per pixel atmospheric effects like the
global fog, fog volumes and soft z buffered particles.

Shadow mask generation uses scene depth to reduce draw call count. For the water we
use the depth value to soft clip the water and fade in a procedural shore effect. Several
post processing effects like motion blur, Depth of Field and Edge blurring (EdgeAA)
make use of the per pixel depth as well. We describe these effects in detail in
[Wenzel07].

8.4.5 World Space Shading

In Far Cry we transformed the view and the light positions into tangent space (relative to
the surface orientation). All data in the pixel shader was in tangent space so shading
computations were done in that space. With multiple lights we were running into
problems passing the light parameters over the limited amount of interpolators. To
overcome this problem we switched to use world-space shading for all computations in
Crisis (in actuality we use world-space shading with an offset in order to reduce floating
point precision issues). The method was already needed for cube map reflections so
code became more unified and shading quality improved as this space is not distorted
as tangent space can be.

Parameters like light position now can be passed in pixel shader constants and don't
need to be updated for each object. However when using only one light and simple
shading the extra pixel cost is higher.

8.5 Shadows and Ambient Occlusion

8.5.1 Shadowing Approach in CryEngine 1

In our first title Far Cry we had shadow maps and projected shadows per object for the
sun shadows. We suffered from typical shadow map aliasing quality issues but it was a
good choice at that time. For performance reasons we pre-computed vegetation
shadows but memory restrictions limited us to very blurry textures. For high end

                                                              103
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

hardware configurations we added shadow maps even to vegetation but combining them
with the pre-computed solution was flawed.

We used stencil shadows for point lights as that were an easier and more efficient
solution. CPU skinning allowed shadow silhouette extraction on the CPU and the GPU
rendered the stencil shadows. It became obvious that this technique would become a
problem the more detailed objects we wanted to render. It relied on CPU skinning,
required extra CPU computation, an upload to GPU, extra memory for the edge data
structures and had hardly predictable performance characteristics. The missing support
for alpha-blended or tested shadow casters made this technique not even usable for the
palm trees ­ an asset that was crucial for the tropical island look (Figure 7).

Figure 7. Far Cry screenshot: note how the soft precomputed shadows combine with the
real-time shadows

For some time during development we had hoped the stencil shadows could be used for
all indoor shadows. However the hard stencil shadows look and performance issues with
many lights made us search for other solutions as well.

One of such solutions is to rely on light maps for shadowing. Light maps have the same
performance no matter how many lights and allow a soft penumbra. Unfortunately what
is usually stored is the result of the shading, a simple RGB color. That doesn't allow
normal mapping. We managed to solve this problem and named our solution
Dot3Lightmaps [Mittring04]. In this approach the light map stores an average light
direction in tangent space together with an average light color and a blend value to lerp
between pure ambient and pure directional lighting. That allowed us to render the diffuse
contribution of static lights with soft shadows quite efficiently. However it was hard to
combine with real-time shadows. After Far Cry we experimented with a simple
modification that we named Occlusion maps. The main concept is to store the shadow
mask value, a scalar value from 0 to 1 that represents the percentage of geometry
occlusion for a texel. We stored the shadow mask of multiple lights in the light map
texture and the usual four texture channels allowed four lights per texel. This way we
rendered diffuse and specular contributions of static lights with high quality soft shadows
while the light color and strength remained adjustable. We kept lights separate so
combining with other shadow types was possible.

                                                              104
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

8.5.2 The Plan for CryEngine 2

The time seemed right for a clean unified shadow system. Because of the problems
mentioned we decided to drop stencil shadows. Shadow maps offer high quality soft
shadows and can be adjusted for better performance or quality so that was our choice.
However that only covers the direct lighting and without the indirect lighting component
the image would not get the cinematographic realistic look we wanted to achieve. The
plan was to have a specialized solution for the direct and another one for the indirect
lighting component.

8.5.3 Direct Lighting

For direct lighting we decided to apply shadow maps (storing depth of objects seen from
the light in a 2D texture) only and drop all stencil shadow code.

8.5.3.1 Dynamic Occlusion Maps

To efficiently handle static lighting situations we wanted to do something new. By using
some kind of unique unwrapping of the indoor geometry the shadow map lookup results
could be stored into an occlusion map and dynamically updated. The dynamic occlusion
map idea was good and it worked but shadows often showed aliasing as now we not
only had shadow map aliasing but also unwrapping aliasing. Stretched textures
introduced more artifacts and it was hard to get rid of all the seams. Additionally we still
required shadow maps for dynamic objects so we decided to get the maximum out of
normal shadow maps and dropped the caching in occlusions maps.

8.5.3.2 Shadow Maps with Screen-Space Randomized Look-up

Plain shadow mapping suffers from aliasing and has hard jagged edges (see first image
in Figure ). The PCF extension (percentage closer filtering) limits the problem (second
image in Figure ) but it requires many samples. Additionally at the time hardware support
was only available on NVIDIA graphics cards such as GeForce 6 and 7 generation and
emulation was even slower. We could implement the same approach on newer ATI
graphics cards by using Fetch4 functionality (as described in [Isidoro06]).

Instead of adding more samples to the PCF filter we had the idea to randomize the
lookup per pixel so that less samples result in similar quality accepting a bit of image
noise. Noise (or grain) is part of any film image and the sample count offers an ideal
property to adjust between quality and performance. The idea was inspired by soft
shadow algorithms for ray tracing and already applied to shadow maps on GPU (See
[Uralsky05] and [Isidoro06] for many details with regards to shadow map quality
improvement and optimization).

                                                              105
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

The randomized offsets that form a disk shape can be applied in 2D when doing the
texture lookup. When using big offsets the quality for flat surfaces can be improved by
orienting the disk shape to the surface. Using a 3D shape like a sphere can have higher
shading cost but it might soften bias problems.

To get acceptable results without too much noise multiple samples are needed. The
sample count and the randomization algorithm can be chosen depending on quality and
performance needs. We tried two main approaches: randomly rotated static kernel
[Isidoro06] and another technique that allowed a simpler pixel shader.

Figure 8. Example of shadow mapping with varied resulting quality: from left to right:
no PCF, PCF, 8 samples, 8 samples+blur, PCF+8 samples, PCF+8 samples+blur

The first technique requires a static table of random 2D points and a texture with random

rotation matrices. Luckily the rotation matrixes are small (2×2) and can be efficiently

stored in a 4 component texture. As the matrices are orthogonal further compression is
possible but not required. Negative numbers can be represented by the usual "scale and
bias" trick (multiply the value by 2 and subtract 1) or by using floating point textures. We
tried different sample tables and in the Figure 8 you can see an example of applying this
approach to a soft disc that works quite well. For a disc shaped caster you would expect
a filled disk but we haven't added the inner samples as the random rotation of those are
less useful for sampling. The effect is rarely visible but to get more correct results we still
consider changing it.

The simpler technique finds its sample positions by transforming one or two random
positive 2D positions from the texture with simple transformations. The first point can be
placed in the middle (mx, my) and four other points can be placed around using the
random value (x, y).

         (mx, my)
         (mx+x, my+y)
         (mx-y, my+x)
         (mx-x, my-y)
         (mx+y, my-x)

More points can be constructed accordingly but we found it only useful for materials
rendered on low end hardware configurations (where we would want to keep the sample
count low for performance reasons).

                                                              106
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

Both techniques also allow adjusting the kernel size to simulate soft shadows. To get
proper results this kernel adjustment would be dependent on the caster distance and the
light radius but often this can be approximated much easier. Initially we randomized by
using a 64x64 texture tiled with a 1:1 pixel mapping over the screen (Figure 9)

                  Figure 9. An example of the randomized kernel adjustment texture

This texture (Figure 9) was carefully crafted to appear random without recognizable
features and with most details in the higher frequencies. Creating a random texture is
fairly straight-forward; we can manually reject textures with recognizable features and
we can maximize higher frequencies applying a simple algorithm that finds a good pair
of neighbor pixels that can be swapped. A good swapping pair will increase high
frequencies (computed by summing up the differences). While there are certainly better
methods to create a random texture with high frequencies), we only describe but this
simple technique as it served our purposes.
Film grain effect is not a static effect so we could potentially animate the noise and
expect it to hide low sample count even more. Unfortunately the result was perceived as
a new type of artifact with low or varying frame rate. Noise without animation looked
pleasing for static scenes; however with a moving camera some recognizable static
features in the random noise remained on the screen.

8.5.3.3 Shadow Maps with Light-Space Randomized Look-up

Fortunately we found a good solution for that problem. Instead of projecting the noise to
the screen we projected a mip-mapped noise texture in world space in the light/sun
direction. In medium and far distance the result was the same but because of bilinear
magnification the nearby shadow edges became distorted and no longer noisy. That
looked significantly better ­ particularly for foliage and vegetation, where the exact
shadow shape was hard to determine.

8.5.3.4 Shadow Mask Texture

We separated the shadow lookup from shading in our shaders in order to avoid the
instruction count limitations of Shader Model 2.0, as well as to reduce the number of
resulting shader combinations and be able to combine multiple shadows. We stored the
8 bit result of the shadow map lookup in a screen-space texture we named shadow

                                                              107
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2
mask. The 4 channel 32 bit texture format offers the required bit count and it can be
used as a render target. As we have 4 channels we can combine up to 4 light
contributions in a texel.

Figure 10. Example of shadow maps with randomized look-up. Left top row image: no
jittering 1 sample, right top row image: screen space noise 8 samples, left bottom: world
space noise 8 samples, right bottom: world space noise with tweaked settings 8 samples

                                                              108
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

Figure 11. Example of the shadow mask texture for a given scene: Left: final rendering
with sun (as a shadow caster) and two shadow-casting lights, right: light mask texture
with three lights in the RGB channels

Figure 12. Example of the shadow mask texture for a given scene - Red, Green and Blue
channel store the shadow mask for 3 individual lights

In the shading pass we bind this texture and render multiple lights and the ambient at
once. We could have used the alpha channel of the frame buffer but then we would have
more passes and draw call count would raise a lot. For opaque objects and alpha test
surfaces the shadow mask is a good solution but it doesn't work very well for alpha
blended geometry. All opaque geometry is represented in the depth buffer but alpha
blended geometry is not modifying the depth buffer. Transparent geometry requires
normal shadow map lookup in the shader.

8.5.3.5 Shadow Maps for Directional Light Sources

In Far Cry we had only a few shadow casting objects and each had its own shadow
map. For many objects its better to combine them on one shadow map. A simple parallel
projection in the direction of the light works but near the viewer the shadow map
resolution is quite low and then shadows appear blocky. Changing the parameterization
like finding a projection matrix that moved more resolution near the viewer is possible
but not without problems. We tried trapezoidal shadow maps ([MT04]) (TSM) and
perspective shadow maps ([SD02]) (PSM).
We had more success with cascaded shadow maps (CSM) where multiple shadow
maps of the same resolution cover the viewer area with multiple projections. Each
projection is enclosed by the previous one with decreasing world to texel ratio. That
technique was giving satisfactory results but wasted some texture space. That was
because the projection only roughly concentrated to the area in front of the viewer. To
find proper projection the view frustum (reduced by the shadow receiving distance) can

                                                              109
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

be sliced up. Each shadow map needs to covers one slice. Slices farther away can
cover bigger world space areas. If the shadow map projection covers the slices tightly
then minimal shadow map area is wasted.

With earlier shadow techniques we already had aliasing of the shadow maps when doing
camera movements and rotations. For PSM and TSM we haven't been able to solve the
issue but for CSM and its modification it was possible. We simply snapped the
projections per shadow map texel and that resulted in a much cleaner look.

8.5.3.6 Deferred Shadow Mask Generation

The initial shadow mask generation pass required rendering of all receiving objects and
that resulted in many draw calls. We decoupled shadow mask generation from the
receiver object count by using deferred techniques. We basically render a full screen
pass that binds the depth texture we created in the early z pass. Simple pixel shader
computations give us the shadow map lookup position based on the depth value. The
indirection over the world-space position is not needed.

As mentioned before we used multiple shadow maps so the shadow mask generation
pixel shader had to identify for each pixel in which shadow map it falls and index into the
right texture. Indexing into a texture can be done with DirectX10 texture arrays feature or
by offsetting the lookup within a combined texture.

By using the stencil buffer we were able to separate processing of the individual slices
and that simplified the pixel shader. Indexing was not needed any more. The modified
technique runs faster as less complex pixel shader computations need to be done. It
also carves away far distant areas that don't receive shadows.

8.5.3.7 Unwrapped Shadow Maps for Point Lights

The usual shadow map approach for point light sources require a cube map texture
lookup. But then hardware PCF cannot be used and on cube maps there is much less
control for managing the texture memory.

We unwrapped the cube map into six shadow maps by separating the six cases with the
stencil buffer, similar we did for CSM. This way we transformed the point light source
problem to the projector light problem. That unified the code and resulted in less code to
maintain and optimize and less shader combinations.

8.5.3.8 Variance Shadow Maps

For terrain we initially wanted to pre-compute a texture with start and end angle. We also
tried to update an occlusion map in real-time with incremental updates. However the

                                                              110
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007
problem has always been objects on the terrain. Big objects, partly on different terrain
sectors required proper shadows. We tried to use our normal shadow map approach and
it gave us a consistent look that wasn't soft enough. Simply making the randomized
lookup with a bigger radius would be far too noisy. Here we tried variance shadow maps
[DL06] and this approach has worked out nicely. The usual drawback of variance
shadow maps arises with multiple shadow casters behind each other but that's a rare
case with terrain shadows.

Figure 13. Example of applying variance shadow maps to a scene. Top image: variance
shadow maps aren't used (note the hard normal shadows), bottom image: with variance
shadow maps (note how the two shadow types combine)

8.5.4 Indirect Lighting

The indirect lighting solution can be split in two sub-problems: the processing intensive
part of computing the indirect lighting and the reconstruction of the data in the pixel
shader (to support per-pixel lighting).

8.5.4.1 3D Transport Sampler

For the first part we had planned to develop a tool called 3D transport sampler. This tool
would make it possible to compute the global illumination data distributed on multiple
machines (for performance reasons). Photon mapping ([Jensen01]) is one of the most
accepted methods for global illumination computation. We decided to use this method
because it can be easily integrated and delivers good results quickly. The photon

                                                              111
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

Figure 14. Real-time ambient maps with one light source

mapper was first used to create a simple light map. The unwrapping technique in our old
light mapper was simple and only combined triangles that were connected and had a
similar plane equation. That resulted in many small 2D blocks we packed into multiple
textures. When used for detailed models it became inefficient in texture usage and it
resulted in many small discontinuities on the unwrapping borders. We changed the
unwrapping technique so it uses the models UV unwrapping as a base and modifies the
unwrapping only where needed. This way the artist had more control over the process
and the technique is more suitable for detailed models. We considered storing
Dot3Lightmaps (explained earlier) but what we tried was a method that should result in
better quality. The idea was to store light contributions for four directions oriented to the
surface. This is similar to the technique that was used in Half-Life 2 ([McTaggart04]) but
there only three directions were used. The more data would allow better quality shading.
The data would allow high quality per-pixel lighting and accepting some approximations
it could be combined with real-time shadows. However storage cost was huge and
computation time was high so we aborted this approach. Actually our original plan was
to store some light map coefficients per texel and others per vertex. Together with a
graph data structure that is connected to the vertices it should be possible to get
dynamic indirect lighting. Low frequency components of the indirect lighting could be
stored in the vertices and high frequency components like sharp corners could be stored
per texel. Development time was critical so this idea was dropped.

8.5.4.2 Real-Time Ambient Map (RAM)

As an alternative we chose a much simpler solution which only required storing one
scalar ambient occlusion value per texel. Ambient occlusion ([ZIK98, Landis02]) can be
computed by shooting rays in all directions ­ something that was reusable from the
photon mapper. The reconstruction in the shader was using what was available: the

                                                              112
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

texel with the occlusion value, the light position relative to the surface, the light color and
the surface normal. The result was a crude approximation of indirect lighting but the
human eye is very forgiving for indirect lighting so it worked out very well.

To support normal maps some average light direction is needed and because of the lack
of something better the light direction blended with the surface normal was used. This
way the normal maps still can be seen and shading appear to have some light angle
dependency. Having ambient brightness, color and attenuation curve adjustable allowed
designers to tweak the final look.

The technique was greater extended to take portals into account, to combine multiple
lights and to support the sun. For huge outdoor areas computing the RAM data for every
surface wouldn't be feasible so we approached that differently.

8.5.4.3 Screen-Space Ambient Occlusion

One of our creative programmers had the idea to use the z buffer data we already had in
a texture to compute some kind of ambient occlusion. The idea was tempting because
all opaque objects could be handled without special cases in constant time and constant
memory. We also could remove a lot of complexity in many areas. Our existing solutions
worked but it we had issues to handle all kind of dynamic situations.

The approach was based on sampling the surrounding of a pixel and with some simple
depth comparisons it was possible to compute a darkening factor to get silhouettes
around objects. To get the ambient occlusion look this effect was limited to only nearby
receivers. After several iterations and optimizations we finally had an unexpected new
feature and we called it "Screen-Space Ambient Occlusion" (SSAO).

We compute the screen-space ambient occlusion in a full screen pass. We
experimented by applying it on ambient, diffuse and specular shading but we found it
works best on ambient only. That was mostly because it changed the look away from
being realistic and that was one of our goals.

To reduce the sample count we vary the sample position for nearby pixels. The initial
sample positions are distributed around the origin in a sphere and the variation is
achieved by reflecting the sample positions on a random 3D plane through the origin.

n: the normalized random per pixel vector from the texture

i:  one of the 3D sample positions in a sphere

float3 reflect( float3 i, float3 n ) { return i - 2 * dot(i, n) * n;

The reflection is simple to compute and it's enough to store the normalized plane normal
in a texture.

    113
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

 Figure 15. Screen-Space Ambient Occlusion in a complete ambient lighting situation
 (note how occluded areas darken at any distance)

Figure 16. Sample scene A with special material setup to visualize SSAO (left: with SSAO,
right: without SSAO)

                                                              114
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

Figure 17. Sample scene B with special material setup to visualize SSAO (left: with SSAO,
right: without SSAO)

Figure 18. Sample scene A with special material setup to visualize SSAO (left: with SSAO,
right: without SSAO)

8.6 Level of Detail
8.6.1 Situation

Level of Detail (LOD) is especially important if the rendering complexity cannot be easily
restricted. Most games have either quite limited view range often realized with fog or
strong occlusion set up by level designers. That's why many games are dominated by
indoor environments but in Far Cry we wanted to show big landscapes with many details
without restricting the players view or position. In Crysis we kept the view range but
added more objects with more variety and higher quality. Quality means more complex
pixel and vertex shaders, higher resolution textures, new texture types (e.g. subsurface)
and more vertices. As we additionally decided to use an early z pass and real-time
shadows we have to pay an even higher price for each object. Because of the higher
draw call count this is mainly a CPU burden and that is one of the areas where
DirectX10 is better. In Far Cry we simply switched between artist-created LOD models.
We also used impostors for vegetation and improved them for Crysis but that's beyond
the scope this chapter.

                                                              115
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

In Crysis we considered using a smooth LOD transition based on moving vertices. Such
techniques often introduce many restrictions for the asset creation. Without such
restrictions assets often can be more optimal and created more quickly. That is
especially true for vegetation rendered alpha-tested or alpha-blended. For some time we
had no transition between LODs and for demo purposes we disabled lower LOD levels
completely. Demo machines have high spec hardware and there the smaller LOD levels
had no increased effect. Lower LODs are usually small on the screen so per pixel cost is
low. Having many LOD levels can be even counterproductive, as those cannot be
instanced together and, so we suffer from higher draw call count.

8.6.2 Dissolve

One of our programmers finally had the idea of a soft LOD transition based on dissolving
the object in the early z pass. As we later on render with z equal comparison we only
had to adjust the early z pass. That was not completely true as surfaces can have
exactly the same z value and then with additive blending those pixels would become
twice as bright. However as the first rendering pass of each object has frame buffer
blending disabled the problem should only occur with subsequent passes. As we can
combine multiple lights in one pass this is a rare case anyway.

The dissolve texture is projected in screen space, and by combining the random value
from the texture with a per object transition value, the pixels are rejected with the texkill
operation or simple alpha-test. With the Alpha2Coverage feature and full scene anti-
aliasing (FSAA) of modern cards that can be even done on a sub-pixel level. Even
without FSAA the dissolve is not that noticeable if we enable our edge-blurring post
processing effect.

Initially we had the transition state only depend on object distance but objects that are in
transition are slower to render and for quality reasons it's better to hide it. That's why we
added code to finish started transitions within a defined small amount of time. We not
only use the dissolve for transitions between 3D objects but also to fade out far away
objects and to hide the transition to impostors.

8.6.3 Water Surface LOD

The ocean or big water surfaces in general have some unique properties that can be
used by specialized render algorithms. Our initial implementation that we used in Far Cry
was based on a simple disk mesh that moved around with the player. Pixel shading,
reflections and transparency defined the look. However we wanted to have real 3D
waves, not based on physical simulation but a cheap procedural solution. We
experimented with some FFT based ocean waves simulation ([Jensen01a],
[Tessendorf04]).

To get 3D waves vertex position manipulation was required and the mesh we used so
far wasn't serving that purpose.

                                                              116
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

8.6.4 Square Water Sectors

The FFT mentioned earlier only outputs a small sector of the ocean and to get a surface
till the horizon we rendered the mesh multiple times. Different LODs had different index
buffers but they all referenced to one vertex buffer that had the FFT data. We shared the
vertex buffer to save performance but for better quality down sampling would be needed.
To reduce aliasing artifacts in the distance and to limit the low polygonal look in the near
we faded out the perturbation for distant vertices and limited the perturbation in the near.
The algorithm worked but many artifacts made us search for a better solution.

8.6.5 Screen-Space Tessellation

We tried a brute force approach that was surprisingly simple and worked out very well.
We used a precomputed screen space tessellated quad and projected the whole mesh
onto the water surface. This ensures correct z buffer behavior and even clips away
pixels above the horizon line. To modify the vertex positions with the FFT wave
simulation data we require vertex texture lookup so this feature cannot be used on all
hardware.

                        Figure 2. Screen-space tessellation in wireframe

The visible vertical lines in the wireframe are due to the mesh stripification we do for
better vertex cache performance. The results looked quite promising however vertices
on the screen border often moved farther away from the border and that was
unacceptable. Adding more vertices even outside of the screen would solve the problem
but attenuating the perturbations on the screen border are hardly noticeable and have
only minimal extra cost.

                                                              117
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

Figure 3. Left: screen space tessellation without edge attenuation (note the area on the
left not covered by water), right: screen space tessellation with edge attenuation

For better performance we reduced the mesh tessellation. Artifacts remained acceptable
even with far less vertices. Tilting the camera made it a slightly worse but not as much
as we expected. The edge attenuation made the water surface camera dependent and
that was bad for proper physics interaction. We had to reduce the wave amplitude a lot
to limit the problem.

8.6.6 Camera Aligned

The remaining issues aliasing artifacts and physics interaction bothered our shader
programmer and he spent some extra hours finding a solution for this. This new method
used a static mesh like the one before. The mesh projection changed from a perspective
to a simple top down projection. The mesh is dragged around with the camera and the
offset is adjusted to get most of the mesh in front of the camera. To render up to the
horizon line the mesh borders are expanded significantly. Tessellation in that area is not
crucial as perturbation can be faded to 0 before that distance.

Figure 204. Camera aligned water mesh in wire frame. Left: camera aligned from top down,
right: camera aligned from viewer perspective

The results of this method are superior to the screen space ones which becomes mostly
visible in motion with subtle camera movement. Apart from the distance attenuation the
wave extent is now viewer independent and as the FFT data is CPU accessible physics
interactions are now possible.

                                                              118
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007

Figure 21. Left: Camera aligned, right: screen space tessellation as comparison

8.6 Conclusion

Through some intricate path we not only found our next generation engine but we also
learned a lot. That learning process was necessary to find, validate and compare
different solutions so in retro perspective it can be classified to research. Why we chose
certain solutions in favor of others is mostly because of quality, production time,
performance and scalability. Crysis, our current game, is a big scale production and to
handle this the production time is very important. Performance of a solution is hardware
dependent (e.g. CPU, GPU, memory) so on a different platform we might have to
reconsider. The current engine is streamlined for a fast DirectX9/DirectX10 card with one
or multiple CPU cores.
Having the depth from the early z pass turned out to be very useful; many features now
rely on this functionality. Regular deferred shading also stores more information per pixel
like the diffuse color, normal and other material properties. For the alien indoor
environment that would probably be the best solution but other environments would
suffer from that decision. In a one light source situation deferred shading simply cannot
play out its advantages.

8.6 Acknowledgements

This presentation is based on the passionate work of many programmers, artist and
designers. Special thanks I would like to contribute to Vladimir Kajalin, Andrey Khonich,
Tiago Sousa, Carsten Wenzel and Nick Kasyan. Because we have been launch partners
with NVIDIA we had on-site help not only for G80 DirectX9 and DirectX10 issues.
Special thanks to those NVIDIA engineers namely Miguel Sainz, Yury Uralsky and Philip
Gerasimov. Leading companies of the industry Microsoft, AMD, Intel and NVIDIA and
many others have been very supportive. Additional thanks to Natalya Tatarchuk and Tim
Parlett that helped me to get this done.

                                                              119
Chapter 8: Finding Next Gen ­ CryEngine 2

8.7 References

[ATI04] ATI 2004, Radeon X800 3DcTM Whitepaper
    http://ati.de/products/radeonx800/3DcWhitePaper.pdf

[DL06] DONNELLY W. AND LAURITZEN A. 2006. Variance shadow maps. In Proceedings of
    the 2006 ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Interactive 3D graphics and games, pp.
    161-165. Redwood City, CA

[ISIDORO06] ISIDORO J. 2006. Shadow Mapping: GPU-based Tips and Techniques. GDC
     presentation. http://ati.amd.com/developer/gdc/2006/Isidoro-ShadowMapping.pdf

[JENSEN01] JENSEN, H. W. 2001. Realistic image synthesis using photon mapping, A. K.
Peters, Ltd., Natick, MA.

[JENSEN01a] JENSEN, L. 2001, Deep-Water Animation and Rendering, Gamasutra article
    http://www.gamasutra.com/gdce/2001/jensen/jensen_pfv.htm

[LANDIS02] LANDIS, H., 2002. RenderMan in Production, ACM SIGGRAPH 2002 Course
    16.

[MICROSOFT07] MICROSOFT DIRECTX SDK. April 2007.
    http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.aspx?FamilyID=86cf7fa2-e953-475c-
    abde-f016e4f7b61a&DisplayLang=en

[MT04] MARTIN, T. AND TAN, T.-S. 2004. Anti-aliasing and continuity with trapezoidal
    shadow maps. In proceedings of Eurographics Symposium on Rendering 2004, pp.
    153­160, 2004.

[MCTAGGART04] MCTAGGART, G. 2004. Half-Life 2 Shading, GDC Direct3D Tutorial
    http://www2.ati.com/developer/gdc/D3DTutorial10_Half-Life2_Shading.pdf

[MITTRING04] MITTRING, M. 2004. Method and Computer Program Product for Lighting a
    Computer Graphics Image and a Computer. US Patent 2004/0155879 A1, August
    12, 2004.

[SD02] STAMMINGER, M. AND DRETTAKIS, G. 2002. Perspective shadow maps. In
    SIGGRAPH 2002 Conference Proceedings, volume 21, 3, pages 557­562, July 2002

[TESSENDORF04] TESSENDORF, J. 2004. Simulating Ocean Surfaces. Part of ACM
    SIGGRAPH 2004 Course 32, The Elements of Nature: Interactive and Realistic
    Techniques, Los Angeles, CA

[URALSKY05] URALSKY, Y. 2005. Efficient Soft-Edged Shadows Using Pixel Shader
    Branching. In GPU Gems 2, M. Pharr, Ed., Addison-Wesley, pp. 269 ­ 282.

[WENZEL05] WENZEL C. 2005. Far Cry and DirectX. GDC presentation, San Francisco, CA
    http://ati.amd.com/developer/gdc/D3DTutorial08_FarCryAndDX9.pdf

                                                              120
      Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games Course ­ SIGGRAPH 2007
[WENZEL06] WENZEL, C. 2006. Real-time Atmospheric Effects in Games. Course 26:

     Advanced Real-Time Rendering in 3D Graphics and Games. Siggraph, Boston, MA.
     August 2006
     http://ati.amd.com/developer/techreports/2006/SIGGRAPH2006/Course_26_SIGGR
     APH_2006.pdf
[WENZEL07] WENZEL C. 2007. Real-time Atmospheric Effects in Games Revisited.
     Conference Session. GDC 2007. March 5-9, 2007, San Francisco, CA.
     http://ati.amd.com/developer/gdc/2007/D3DTutorial_Crytek.pdf
[ZIK98] ZHUKOV, S., IONES, A., AND KRONIN, G. 1998. An ambient light illumination model.
     In Rendering Techniques '98 (Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop on
     Rendering), pp. 45­55.

                                                              121
