id="tendon-spatial"> tendon/ ⁠ spatial ​ # This element creates a spatial tendon, which is a minimum-length path passing through specified via-points and wrapping around specified obstacle geoms. The objects along the path are defined with the sub-elements site and geom below. One can also define pulleys which split the path in multiple branches. Each branch of the tendon path must start and end with a site, and if it has multiple obstacle geoms they must be separated by sites - so as to avoid the need for an iterative solver at the tendon level. This example illustrates a multi-branch tendon acting as a finger extensor, with a counter-weight instead of an actuator: tendon.xml . A second form of wrapping is where the tendon is constrained to pass through a geom rather than wrap around it. This is enabled automatically when a sidesite is specified and its position is inside the volume of the obstacle geom. Visualization: Tendon paths are visualized as in the image above, respecting the width , material and rgba attributes below. A special kind of visualization is used for unactuated 2-point tendons with range or springlength of the form [0 X] , with positive X. Such tendons act like a cable, applying force only when stretched. Therefore when not stretched, they are drawn as a catenary of length X, as in the clip on the right of this example model . name : string, optional Name of the tendon. class : string, optional Defaults class for setting unspecified attributes. group : int, “0” Integer group to which the tendon belongs. This attribute can be used for custom tags. It is also used by the visualizer to enable and disable the rendering of entire groups of tendons. limited : [false, true, auto], “auto” If this attribute is “true”, the length limits defined by the range attribute below are imposed by the constraint solver. If this attribute is “auto”, and autolimits is set in compiler , length limits will be enabled if range is defined. actuatorfrclimited : [false, true, auto], “auto” This attribute specifies whether actuator forces acting on the tendon should be clamped. See Force limits for details. This attribute interacts with the actuatorfrcrange attribute. If this attribute is “false”, actuator force clamping is disabled. If it is “true”, actuator force clamping is enabled. If this attribute is “auto”, and autolimits is set in compiler , actuator force clamping will be enabled if actuatorfrcrange is defined. range : real(2), “0 0” Range of allowed tendon lengths. Setting this attribute without specifying limited is an error, unless autolimits is set in compiler . actuatorfrcrange : real(2), “0 0” Range for clamping total actuator forces acting on this tendon. See Force limits for details. The compiler expects the lower bound to be nonpositive and the upper bound to be nonnegative. Setting this attribute without specifying actuatorfrclimited is an error if compiler-autolimits is “false”. solreflimit , solimplimit Constraint solver parameters for simulating tendon limits. See Solver parameters . solreffriction , solimpfriction Constraint solver parameters for simulating dry friction in the tendon. See also Friction . margin : real, “0” The limit constraint becomes active when the absolute value of the difference between the tendon length and either limit of the specified range falls below this margin. Similar to contacts, the margin parameter is subtracted from the difference between the range limit and the tendon length. The resulting constraint distance is always negative when the constraint is active. This quantity is used to compute constraint impedance as a function of distance, as explained in Solver parameters . frictionloss : real, “0” Friction loss caused by dry friction. To enable friction loss, set this attribute to a positive value. width : real, “0.003” Radius of the cross-section area of the spatial tendon, used for rendering. Parts of the tendon that wrap around geom obstacles are rendered with reduced width. material : string, optional Material used to set the appearance of the tendon. rgba : real(4), “0.5 0.5 0.5 1” Color and transparency of the tendon. When this value is different from the internal default, it overrides the corresponding material properties. If a material is unspecified and rgba has the default value, limited tendons whose length exceeds the limit are recolored using the value of the constraint impedance \(d\) to mix the default color and rgba/constraint . springlength : real(2), “-1 -1” Spring resting position, can take either one or two values. If one value is given, it corresponds to the length of the tendon at rest. If it is -1 , the tendon resting length is determined from the model reference configuration in mjModel.qpos0 . Note that the default value of -1 , which invokes the automatic length computation, was designe