                             MITSUBISHI ELECTRIC RESEARCH LABORATORIES
                                                    http://www.merl.com

                   Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

                                     Addy Ngan, Fredo Durand, Wojciech Matusik

                                                  TR2005-151 June 2005

                                                            Abstract
       The Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) describes the appearance of a ma-
       terial by its interaction with light at a surface point. A variety of analytical models have been
       proposed to represent BRDFs. However, analysis of these models has been scarce due to the lack
       of high-resolution measured data. In this work we evaluate several well-known analytical mod-
       els in terms of their ability to fit measured BRDFs. We use an existing high-resolution data set
       of a hundred isotropic materials and compute the best approximation for each analytical model.
       Furthermore, we have built a new setup for efficient acquisition of anisotropic BRDFs, which
       allows us to acquire anisotropic materials at high resolution. We have measured four samples
       of anisotropic materials (brushed aluminum, velvet, and two satins). Based on the numerical
       errors, function plots, and rendered images we provide insights into the performance of the vari-
       ous models. We conclude that for most isotropic materials physically-based analytic reflectance
       models can represent their appearance quite well. We illustrate the important difference between
       the two common ways of defining the specular lobe: around the mirror direction and with respect
       to the half-vector. Our evaluation shows that the latter gives a more accurate shape for the reflec-
       tion lobe. Our analysis of anisotropic materials indicates current parametric reflectance models
       cannot represent their appearances faithfully in many cases. We show that using a sampled mi-
       crofacet distribution computed from measurements improves the fit and qualitatively reproduces
       the measurements.

This work may not be copied or reproduced in whole or in part for any commercial purpose. Permission to copy in whole or in part
without payment of fee is granted for nonprofit educational and research purposes provided that all such whole or partial copies include
the following: a notice that such copying is by permission of Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc.; an acknowledgment of
the authors and individual contributions to the work; and all applicable portions of the copyright notice. Copying, reproduction, or
republishing for any other purpose shall require a license with payment of fee to Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc. All
rights reserved.

                                         Copyright c Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc., 2005
                                                    201 Broadway, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
MERLCoverPageSide2
Eurographics Symposium on Rendering (2005)
Kavita Bala, Philip Dutré (Editors)

Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

Addy Ngan, Frédo Durand, and Wojciech Matusik

                                            MIT CSAIL            MERL

Abstract
The Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) describes the appearance of a material by its in-
teraction with light at a surface point. A variety of analytical models have been proposed to represent BRDFs.
However, analysis of these models has been scarce due to the lack of high-resolution measured data. In this work
we evaluate several well-known analytical models in terms of their ability to fit measured BRDFs. We use an
existing high-resolution data set of a hundred isotropic materials and compute the best approximation for each
analytical model. Furthermore, we have built a new setup for efficient acquisition of anisotropic BRDFs, which
allows us to acquire anisotropic materials at high resolution. We have measured four samples of anisotropic ma-
terials (brushed aluminum, velvet, and two satins). Based on the numerical errors, function plots, and rendered
images we provide insights into the performance of the various models. We conclude that for most isotropic ma-
terials physically-based analytic reflectance models can represent their appearance quite well. We illustrate the
important difference between the two common ways of defining the specular lobe: around the mirror direction and
with respect to the half-vector. Our evaluation shows that the latter gives a more accurate shape for the reflec-
tion lobe. Our analysis of anisotropic materials indicates current parametric reflectance models cannot represent
their appearances faithfully in many cases. We show that using a sampled microfacet distribution computed from
measurements improves the fit and qualitatively reproduces the measurements.

1. Introduction                                                  1.1. Related Work

Realistic graphics can be seen as a variant of physics that      BRDF research has combined skilled engineering and firm
addresses light interaction. Physical sciences involve both      scientific principles. Empirical models respond to engineer-
a modeling phase where real phenomena are modeled with           ing tradeoffs between realism and efficiency, two criteria that
quantitative law, and an experimental validation phase. In       are highlighted by the advent of programmable real-time
realistic graphics, validation is challenging because the phe-   shading. Physical models are derived from first principles
nomena are complex and measuring all the scene parameters        and they have been compared against real data when avail-
is difficult [MRC86, RWP95]. In this paper, we tackle an         able [CT81, HTSG91, War92].
important part of the equation by focusing on material re-
flectance and the associated models. With the presence of a         Unfortunately, real BRDF data have long been hard to ac-
large number of BRDF models, we feel that an experimental        quire and measurements were often limited in angular res-
analysis and comparison is sorely needed. In this paper, we      olution. Recent research efforts have resulted in a wider
evaluate the performance of various BRDF models by com-          availability of BRDF data [Cor, Nis, War92, DvGNK99,
paring their abilities to represent real measured BRDFs. We      MWL99,MPBM03,HP03,SSK03]. This provides us with a
believe our analysis can serve as a guide for practitioners in   unique opportunity to experimentally analyze BRDF models
their choice on BRDF models, and our extended data fitting       and gain a practical experience on their ability to represent
results should also serve as starting points for using the more  real BRDFs.
sophisticated models.
                                                                    Understanding the tradeoffs and fitting performances of
 email: addy, fredo@csail.mit.edu                                BRDFs is becoming increasingly important [SHSL97]. In-
 email: matusik@merl.com                                         verse rendering, e.g. [FGR93,Mar98,YDMH99] and new ac-
                                                                 quisition techniques, e.g. [SWI97, LKG01, KBMK01] typ-
 c The Eurographics Association 2005.                            ically estimate reflectance properties using a very sparse
Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

set of observations. Even data acquired using gonioreflec-      of materials, and effects such as retroreflection might be
tometers often do not contain many samples and can exhibit      underrepresented. In fact, our BRDFs have no valid sam-
noise, e.g. [Bor03]. These limitations prevent the direct use   ples within 3 degrees from the retroreflection direction since
of the measured data and make the fit to an analytical model    the light source occludes the detector. The BRDFs were ac-
a requirement. The low sampling rate and noise level make       quired by capturing images of a sphere sample lit by a point
the BRDF fitting very underconstrained, and the final vi-       source from a dense set of directions, similar to Marschner
sual result is heavily dependent on the choice of the model.    et al. [MWL99]. This image-based method allows for high
Dana et al. [DNGK97] fit a wide range of materials to BRDF      angular resolution measurement since many radiance sam-
models. However, their data set is limited in resolution (205   ples can be recorded in one single image. However, this mea-
viewing/illumination combinations), and they only fit to the    surement setup is limited to isotropic BRDFs and requires
Oren-Nayar model [ON94] and the Koenderink representa-          spherical samples.
tion [KvDS96] based on Zernike polynomials.
                                                                2.2. Anisotropic BRDF acquisition setup
1.2. Overview
                                                                In this work, we extend the image-based BRDF acquisi-
In this paper, we provide experimental analysis and insights    tion setup to handle anisotropic materials (Figure 1), simi-
that should guide practitioners in the field. While previous    lar to Lu et al. [LKK00]. Spherical samples provide a two-
work in BRDF modeling has validated the proposed models         dimensional set of normals in each image, but it is diffi-
using physical measurements, the number of materials used       cult to manufacture spherical samples for some materials.
in the validation is typically small and often confined to the  Marschner et al. [MWL99] also use a cylindrical target
category on which the model is primarily focused. In our        shape for some measurements but only acquire BRDFs in the
study we quantify and compare the performance of seven an-      incidence plane. Using a cylindrical target any planar sam-
alytical BRDF models on a data set of 100 isotropic BRDFs       ple that is flexible can be wrapped on the surface without
acquired at high resolution and covering a wide range of ma-    distortion. In our setup we compensate for the lost degree
terials. We also conduct a study on a data set of 4 common      of freedom in the normal variations by mounting the cylin-
anisotropic materials measured at high resolution. The read-    der on a precision motor and performing measurements at
ers should refer to our website for complete fitting results    different tilt angles. In order to account for anisotropy the
and instructions for raw data access.                           rectangular strips on the cylinder are obtained from a pla-
                                                                nar sample of the material at different orientations. Together
   We observe that most isotropic materials under natu-         with the degree of freedom for the light position, we are able
ral illumination can be represented reasonably well using       to acquire the full 4D BRDF using a large set of two dimen-
physically-based reflectance models. One of our observa-        sional images. Figure 2 shows an example input image of a
tions is that constructions based on the mirror-angle poorly    acquired velvet sample.
model real reflectance. In particular, we emphasize that the
basis functions of the Lafortune et al. [LFTG97] model are         Cylinder (1D normal variation)
not a good match to the shape of the primary reflection lobe
of many materials (Section 4.5).                                   with stripes of the material

   Our study indicates that some anisotropic materials can         at different orientations (1D)
exhibit a complexity that exceeds the expressive power
of current parametric BRDF models. We show that the             Precision                  Camera
microfacet-based BRDF generator proposed by Ashikhmin             motor
et al. [APS00] provides many more degrees of freedom and
is able to reproduce these measurements qualitatively. We        Rotation of               Light source path (1D)
describe an iterative method to estimate the microfacet dis-     cylinder (1D)
tribution directly from the measured BRDF (Section 5).
                                                                Light source
2. Data set and acquisition
                                                                                Precision
2.1. Isotropic BRDFs                                                              motor

We use a data set of 100 BRDFs measured with high pre-          Figure 1: Acquisition setup for anisotropic materials. The
cision acquired by Matusik et al. [MPBM03]. The data set        cylinder tilt, surface normal variation, light position and
includes metals, plastics, painted surfaces, and fabrics. We    strip orientation each contributes to one degree of freedom
acknowledge that our data set does not cover the full range     for acquiring the 4D BRDF.

 http://groups.csail.mit.edu/graphics/brdf/                        The sampling density of the light position and cylinder
                                                                positions can be adjusted easily as they are controlled by

                                                                                           c The Eurographics Association 2005.
                                      Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

precision motors. The resolution of the acquired BRDF is           We sample the isotropic and anisotropic data with inter-
mainly limited by the number of material strips mounted on      vals of 1 and 2 degrees respectively, and approximately 85%
the cylinder. It is difficult to use strips narrower than 1cm   and 25% of the bins are non-empty. The processed data can
due to the manual procedure of attaching the strips to the      be used directly for fitting by ignoring the empty bins.
cylinder.
                                                                3. Methodology
        Figure 2: Target cylinder covered with velvet.
                                                                3.1. BRDF models
2.3. Anisotropic data
Our anisotropic data set currently includes 4 materials: vel-   We choose seven analytical isotropic models for our anal-
vet, two satins, and brushed aluminum. The light position       ysis: Ward [War92], Blinn-Phong [Bli77], Cook-Torrance
is rotated at 2 degrees interval and covers most of the full    [CT81], Lafortune et al. [LFTG97], Ashikhmin-Shirley
circle. Positions where the light occludes the camera or is     [AS00], He et al. [HTSG91], and a variant of the Ward
occluded by the cylinder are discarded. The motor driving       model proposed by Duer [Due04], which fixes the normal-
the cylinder is incremented at an interval of 5 degrees, from   ization of the specular lobe. The formulas for the models
0 to 180. The strips on the cylinder are cut from a planar      are listed in the supplemental document on our website, and
sample of the material using a laser cutter to obtain precise   the reader is referred to the original papers for further de-
orientation. The strip orientation ranges from 0 to 180 de-     tails. These models differ in their degrees of freedom and
grees spaced at 9 degrees intervals. Combining this with the    goals, ranging from physically-based to ad-hoc models de-
cylinder rotation provides a full 360 coverage. For each ob-    signed for computation speed. Comparing them is in a sense
ject/light position combination, we take 8 images with expo-    "unfair," and we only focus on the numerical ability to fit
sure time from 40 microseconds to 1 second, and combine         measured data.
them to form a high dynamic range image. The acquisition
time is about 16 hours for each material and the raw uncom-        To evaluate the performance of the analytical models, we
pressed data size is 30GB.                                      first restrict them to have only one specular lobe and the dif-
                                                                fuse contribution to be Lambertian. The shape of the specu-
2.4. Data processing                                            lar lobe is enforced to be identical across the color channels,
Each pixel in the input images with non-zero irradiance is      and hence all the BRDF models can be expressed with six
considered a BRDF sample. We group all the samples into         parameters for the diffuse and specular color, and a variable
bins uniformly spaced in the 4D angular space defined by        number of parameters for the specular lobe:
in, out , in, out . We set the BRDF values to the median
value in each bin.                                              M = (dr, dg, db)di f f use+(sr, sg, sb)specular(p0, p1, ..., pn)

   The isotropic data from Matusik et al. was originally rep-   3.2. Fitting BRDFs
resented using the Rusinkiewicz parameterization based on
the half-vector and tabulated non-uniformly to optimize for     A core part of our analysis is to fit measured BRDFs to an-
rendering quality. To avoid bias due to the choice of param-    alytical models. We apply constrained nonlinear optimiza-
eterizations and binning intervals, we reprocess the isotropic  tion techniques based on Sequential Quadratic Program-
data directly from the raw acquired images according to the     ming(SQP) over the specular lobe parameters p0, p1, ..., pn
same procedure described above.                                 to minimize the error metric described in the next paragraph.
                                                                The diffuse and specular color (6 parameters) are computed
                                                                analytically as a sub-procedure based on linear least square.
                                                                Like any nonlinear optimization, the quality of the fit is de-
                                                                pendent on a good initial guess. To make sure the optimiza-
                                                                tion converges to the global minimum, we visually inspect
                                                                the fitting quality of the result and if necessary restart the
                                                                optimization from a different set of initial guesses.

                                                                   Our fitting procedure does not take into account knowl-
                                                                edge about the meaning of physically-based parameters for
                                                                models such as Cook-Torrance or He et al. While this might
                                                                result in physically-inconsistent values, it provides the best
                                                                approximation of the data. Using a constrained optimization
                                                                is an interesting avenue of future work.

                                                                3.3. Error Metric

                                                                The objective function of the optimization is defined as the
                                                                mean squared error between the measured BRDF R, and the

c The Eurographics Association 2005.
        Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

target model M given parameter vector p:                         the BRDF over the outgoing hemisphere, given an incident
                                                                 direction. We compute the albedos of the BRDF over the
E(p) =   w[R(i, o)cosi - M(i, o; p)cosi]2  (1)                   range of 0 to 80 degrees incidence, and we use the maxi-
                               w                                 mum value to normalize the errors plotted in Figure 14. This
                                                                 normalization allows us to compare the residue errors for
   The sum is over the non-empty bins of R, i and o are          different materials while discounting the factor of relative
the incident and outgoing directions respectively, and i is      scale. In certain cases, the absolute error can be more mean-
the elevation angle of the incident direction. The weight w is   ingful (e.g. darker materials are easier to approximate). The
the solid angle correction term. We ignore data with incident    absolute errors are reported in the supplementary document
or outgoing angle larger than 80 degrees as measurements         available on our website.
close to extreme grazing angles are in general unreliable.
The metric is essentially a L2 metric over the hemispheres,         We sort the materials according to the errors of the Lafor-
with part of the domain removed where there is a lack of         tune fits. The errors for the Ashikhmin-Shirley and Ward-
reliable measurements. The form of this metric allows us to      Duer models are not shown in the figure: the Ashikhmin-
separate the linear parameters (diffuse/specular color) from     Shirley errors are very close to Cook-Torrance in most cases,
the main optimization, which greatly improves the efficiency     and the Ward-Duer errors are very close to the original Ward,
and stability of the fitting routine.                            though consistently lower.

   The cos i term in the metric weighs the BRDF under               Figure 14 shows that He, Cook-Torrance and Ashikhmin-
the assumption of uniform incoming radiance, and in prac-        Shirley typically have the lowest errors. One factor of their
tice we observe that the optimal fit with the cosine factor      good performance is probably their explicit modeling of the
produces renderings which are visually superior to the fit       Fresnel effect. In the case of the He model, the number of
without it. Lafortune et al. [LFTG97] define the objective       degrees of freedom is also bigger. In contrast Blinn-Phong
function for fitting as the BRDF difference multiplied by the    and Ward consistently yield higher errors. The errors for the
cosines of both the incident and outgoing elevation angles.      Lafortune model lie in between for a majority of the mate-
We find that the additional cosine factor gives results which    rials. To the left end of the plot are mostly diffuse or mildly
are visually similar to ours.                                    glossy materials like fabrics, rubber and paints, while ma-
                                                                 terials close to the right end are mostly smooth metals and
   We have experimented with other fitting metrics based on      highly specular plastics. The normalized errors span several
the logarithm or cubic root of the BRDF. As the logarithm        order of magnitudes as the shape of the BRDF is vastly dif-
behaves badly near zero, it imposes an arbitrary choice of       ferent for the wide spectrum of materials.
scaling the BRDF, and in practice it is difficult to make a
single choice that consistently performs well for all materi-    Figure 3: Fitting the measured "green-metallic-paint"
als. For the metric based on the cubic-root, the best-fit BRDF   BRDF with the seven models. Clockwise from upper left:
often result in renderings with highlights that are too blurry   Measured, Ward, Ward-Duer, Blinn-Phong, He, Ashikhmin-
compared to the measured data.                                   Shirley, Cook-Torrance, Lafortune.

   It is clear that choosing an appropriate metric for fitting
BRDF is difficult, and our choice of the direct L2 metric is
based on two reasons: i) it provides plausible fits in the ren-
dered images for most materials in our data set, ii) the linear
nature of the metric makes the minimization lower dimen-
sional and more stable. We should emphasize that the best fit
according to our metric might not always correspond to the
best visual match, which is highly dependent on scene ge-
ometry/illumination. Developing a perceptually-based met-
ric which is simple and stable for optimization would be in-
teresting direction for future work.

4. Isotropic material analysis                                      One example fit, to the measurement "green-metallic-
                                                                 paint" is shown in Figure 3 with spheres rendered under an
4.1. Fitting quality of the models                               environment map. The polar plots in the incidence plane for
                                                                 three models are also shown in Figure 4. The relative quality
We fit the isotropic data set of 100 materials to the seven      of the fits from the different models for this material is typ-
models listed in the previous section. The fitting errors of 5   ical of the data set. The Ward, Ward-Duer and Blinn-Phong
of the models are plotted in Figure 14. The errors are nor-      images are all noticeably different from the original data.
malized by the maximum albedo of each BRDF and plotted           The highlights near the center of the sphere are significantly
in logarithmic scale. The albedo is computed by integrating
                                                                                                                              c The Eurographics Association 2005.
               Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

Ward                                                                                                                                                          2
Cook-Torrance                                                                                                                                                             Cook-Torrance 1

                                                                                                                                                                 Cook-Torrance 2

                                                                                                                                                              1  Lafortune 1

                                                                                                                                                                 Lafortune 2

                                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                        log (Err/Max Albedo)-1

                                                                                                                                      -2   10

Lafortune
                                                                                                                                      -3

                                                                                                                                                            -4

                                                                                                                                                                 5            10           15        20  25  30

                                                                                                                                                                                           Material

Figure 4: Polar plots of the measured "green-metallic-paint"      Figure 5: The fitting errors (logarithmic scale) with one/two
in the incidence plane compared to the fits from the Ward,        lobes of the Cook-Torrance and the Lafortune models.
Cook-Torrance and Lafortune models. Cubic root applied.

brighter than the original, and near grazing angle the high-      cosine lobes [LFTG97] serve as basis functions for repre-
lights are much less pronounced. Of the three models, Ward-       senting BRDFs and thus multiple lobes are expected in gen-
Duer has the strongest highlight near grazing angle, but it is    eral. We fit the data set with the two lobes version of both
still noticeably dimmer than the measured data. The images        the Cook-Torrance and Lafortune models. In 26 cases for
from the Ashikhmin-Shirley, Cook-Torrance and He fits are         Cook-Torrance and 31 cases for Lafortune, the extra lobe re-
very similar to each other and are mostly faithful to the di-     duces the error by more than 25%. These typically include
rect rendering. The Lafortune fit shows an abrupt increase in     materials that have multiple layers of finishing (e.g. metallic
intensity near grazing angle, however values closer to nor-       paints) and also some brushed metals. The fitting errors with
mal incidence are too low. In addition, the highlight is ex-      the Cook-Torrance and the Lafortune models with one and
cessively blurred along the circumference of the sphere, an       two lobes for the 30 most improved materials are shown in
effect that we will look into in Section 4.5.                     Figure 5. Figure 6 shows the comparison of the one and two
                                                                  lobes fit to the nickel sample.
   With a broader view over the entire data set, we find that
physically-based models like Cook-Torrance and He often              Lafortune et al. [LFTG97] employed three lobes for the
produce the best fits. The He model, which is known to be         example materials. However, we found that in practice, fit-
the most comprehensive BRDF model, does not produce no-           ting with three lobes is very unstable, and hence in the cur-
ticeably superior visual results to the Cook-Torrance model.      rent version we omit results from the three-lobe Lafortune
However, it should be noted that our measurement and anal-        model. Qualitatively, we believe the addition of a third lobe
ysis ignore polarization and spectral dependence, two impor-      would only offer marginal improvements to the shape mis-
tant aspects modeled by He. The Lafortune model, without          match of the main lobe.
an explicit Fresnel factor, yields reasonable fits for materials
that do not show significant intensity increase near grazing      4.3. Evaluation of different microfacet distributions
angle. In addition, glossy materials are not good candidates
for the Lafortune model due to the anisotropic blurriness         There are three common choices of the shape of the specular
near grazing angle. The Blinn-Phong and Ward model both           lobe: Gaussian, cosine power, and the Beckmann distribu-
have near constant reflection power independent of incident       tion function. Our study shows that the fitting quality of the
angle, and thus they are only suitable to a subclass of the       Cook-Torrance model with the three different formulations
materials, including some metals and plastics. The Duer ver-      are nearly identical both numerically and visually.
sion of the Ward model with increased strength near grazing
improves the fitting performance, however the improvement         4.4. Fresnel effect
is limited as the grazing angle increase is not controllable.
                                                                  To study the importance of the Fresnel effect, we compare
4.2. Multiple lobes                                               the fit quality of the Cook-Torrance model with and without
                                                                  the standard Fresnel term, and also with the Schlick [Sch94]
Cook and Torrance [CT81] suggest that two or more spec-           approximation. While the errors without the Fresnel term are
ular lobes are necessary to model surfaces where there are        significantly higher (20% on average), the Schlick approx-
multiple scales of roughness. Lafortune et al's generalized       imation does not introduce further errors compared to the
                                                                  original formulation.
 c The Eurographics Association 2005.
Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

Figure 6: Fitting the measured BRDF "nickel" with the multi-lobe Cook-Torrance and Lafortune models. Left to Right: Input,
Cook-Torrance 1 lobe, Cook-Torrance 2 lobes, Lafortune 1 lobe, Lafortune 2 lobes.

4.5. Shape of the specular lobe                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                    N
Our fitting results highlight the profound difference between                                      L
two popular formulations of the specular lobe and their ef-
fects at near grazing angles. Most previous discussions of                                                                               VH
the behavior of reflectance when the incident angle moves                                                                             R
toward grazing have focused on the increase in intensity of
the reflection. As such, BRDF models are often only com-             Figure 7: The V · R lobe compared with the H · N lobe
pared to measurements in the incidence plane. We find that           remapped to the outgoing directions.
the shape of the lobe also has important implications. The
mirror angle construction employed by models like Phong              L. The blue circle around the normal N denotes the cone of
and Lafortune, results in excessively blurry reflections near        directions where the dot product with N is constant. One of
grazing angle. While the shape difference between these two          the half-vectors H in this set is shown. We can map H to
lobe constructions is known to BRDF specialists, we believe          its corresponding outgoing direction VH , following a great
it is important to restate it in the context of experimental         circle on the sphere of directions. This can be done for the
evaluation, so that practitioners understand the tradeoff in         entire set of half-vectors in the blue circle, and we show the
models such as Lafortune that sacrifice lobe shape for com-          corresponding set of outgoing directions in green around the
putation speed.                                                      mirror vector R. Comparing it to the red circle, representing
                                                                     the cone of directions V with constant V · R, the remapped
   In the original Phong model [Pho75], the specular lobe is         contour is asymmetric and is narrower in the direction per-
defined around the mirror direction symmetrically (V · R). In        pendicular to the incident plane. By similar construction, we
the Blinn variation of the Phong model and most microfacet-          can visualize that this contour is more circular when L is
based models, the specular lobe is expressed with respect to         near N, and becomes narrower when L moves towards graz-
the half vector H and the normal N, where H is the average           ing angle. The V · R lobe is, however, always circular around
vector between the incident and outgoing vector. The Lafor-          the mirror direction R.
tune model, on the other hand, employs a generalized cosine
lobe similar to the original Phong lobe. While the general-             A plot of the measured BRDF of PVC plastic at 55 inci-
ized dot product gives flexibility in specifying the principal       dent angle is shown in Figure 8. It displays a similar asym-
reflection direction, the lobe remains symmetric around the          metry to the remapped contour associated with the H · N
main reflection direction. Hence, the Lafortune lobe is sim-         lobe. This asymmetry is observed in the data set for most
ilar to the V · R lobe where R can be seen as a generalized          materials with an apparent specular lobe. Such behavior can
mirror direction.                                                    be explained by the microfacet theory, e.g. [CT81]. The the-
                                                                     ory models the surface as a collection of microfacets, with
   Since all analytical models we have considered are func-          normals oriented according to some distribution function.
tions of either H · N or V · R, we focus the rest of our dis-        Assuming that the microfacets are perfect mirrors, the re-
cussion on isocontours of these dot products in the space of         flectance from L to V is then proportional to the fraction
directions. We illustrate the difference between the two rep-
resentations in Figure 7. Consider a given incident direction                                                                     c The Eurographics Association 2005.

 The generalized cosine lobe:

   fr(u, v) = sCs(u)[u · v]n, u = normalize(Cxux,Cyuy,Czuz) (2)

where u and v are the incident and outgoing angle respectively, and
Cs(u) is a scalar factor independent of v.
                                              Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

                      N                       N                 BRDF of three variables. They went on to introduce a new
R                                                          L    set of 2D coordinates which can be considered as a hy-
                                                                brid of the two families of parameterization. They showed
                                      L                         that their parameterization produces superior approximation
                                                                to two measured materials when the BRDFs are projected
                                           R                    onto the 2D domain. Further investigating the performance
                                                                of Stark et al.'s proposed model and variants based on the
Figure 8: Side and top-down view of the measured "PVC"          hybrid parameterization would be an interesting avenue for
BRDF, at 55 incidence. (Cubic root is applied to the BRDF       future work.
for visualization.) Its specular lobe exhibits a similar asym-
metry to the H · N lobe.                                        5. Anisotropic material analysis
                                                                In this section we describe our first step in analyzing
of microfacets with normals aligned with the half-vector H,     anisotropic reflectance models and how they are able to rep-
with some adjustments for shadowing and masking. Thus,          resent measured anisotropic materials. As described in Sec-
the reflectance function for a microfacet model is naturally    tion 2.2, we have acquired high resolution samples for four
defined with respect to H. For isotropic models, the distri-    different highly anisotropic materials.
bution of normals is radially symmetric; therefore, a cone
of half-vector H around N should have constant reflectance      Figure 9: Brushed Aluminum: One measurement photo-
value if the shadowing and masking terms are not consid-        graph (upper left), reconstruction using Ward model (x =
ered. Hence, it is reasonable to define reflectance as a func-  0.04, y = 0.135) (upper right), reconstruction using Poulin-
tion of H · N under this theory. On the contrary, the V · R     Fournier model (n = 3000, d = 0.18, h = 0.5)(lower left),
contour is not consistent with any distribution of normals, as  reconstruction using Ashikhmin model with sampled micro-
a circular cone of vectors around different Rs with the same    facet distribution (lower right).
spread would map to a different set of half-vectors around
N.                                                                 In our data set two materials (brushed aluminum and yel-
                                                                low satin) are suitable for analytic modeling. We fit two dif-
   The difference between the two formulations explains the     ferent anisotropic analytic models to these measurements
anisotropic blurring for the Lafortune fits in Figure 6 and     ­ anisotropic Ward and Poulin-Fournier models, using the
Figure 3. Compared to a half-vector based lobe, the sym-        same fitting procedure as for the isotropic materials. We
metric mirror lobe does not get narrow at grazing angles,       present the visual comparison of the fit for the brushed alu-
resulting in blurring in the direction orthogonal to the inci-  minum to the original measurements in Figure 9. As can be
dent plane, which is along the circumference for the case of    seen, these models can qualitatively represent brushed alu-
a sphere.                                                       minum relatively faithfully. The yellow satin (not shown) has
                                                                blurrier highlights, but the anisotropy is qualitatively similar
   We have shown that the H · N representation is a more        to the brushed aluminum. As a result it can also be modeled
accurate way to model specular reflections. This is in strong   reasonably well with the analytical models.
opposition to some beliefs that the half-vector representation
is just a more convenient way of interpreting the specular
lobe. We believe this has been overlooked in the past mainly
due to the fact that the two representations are trivially re-
lated in the incidence plane.

   Note that this observation is different from the popular
re-parameterization proposed by Rusinkiewicz [Rus98] that
also emphasizes the importance of the half vector. In his
work, he shows that the parameterization based on half-
angle is a more compact representation in the context of
compression, compared to the standard BRDF parameteri-
zation based on the incident and outgoing directions. In our
work, we compare the shape of the reflection lobe defined
by the half vector to the one defined by the mirror direction.

   Stark et al. [SAS05] show that Ward and Lafortune can
both be mathematically reduced to bivariate functions, and
thus they are inherently unable to represent general isotropic

c The Eurographics Association 2005.
                 Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

5.1. More Complex Anisotropy                                      well-preserved, although their sharpness is not reproduced
                                                                  exactly.
Some fabrics that exhibit anisotropic reflectance properties
can have much more complicated micro-geometry since the           Figure 10: Left: Purple satin - one input photograph. Right:
way threads are woven together can be potentially much            - reconstruction using sampled microfacet distribution.
more complex than the simple structure of a brushed metal.
We observe that the BRDFs of the purple satin and red velvet         The computed microfacet distributions also match the mi-
far exceed the expressive power of simple analytical models       crostructure of the materials. Compare the spherical plot of
(e.g., the purple satin sample in Figure 10 shows two off-        the microfacet density in Figure 11 with a macro photo-
specular peaks). This is why we turn to the microfacet-based      graph of the corresponding sample of brushed aluminum.
BRDF generator presented by Ashikhmin et al. [APS00]              The density is high around a vertical great circle, which is the
since it offers many more degrees of freedom by replac-           type of normal distribution expected from cylindrical micro-
ing the analytical expression for the microfacet distribution     geometry.
by an arbitrary tabulated representation. In their paper, it is
shown how to compute a BRDF given a microfacet distri-
bution. In order to use their model to approximate our mea-
sured data, we need to solve the inverse problem and esti-
mate the microfacet distribution from the BRDF.

Computing a microfacet distribution from a BRDF We
first recall the expression for the Ashikhmin et al. model:

(k1, k2)  =  p(h) h · n F(k · h)                 (3)
                4g(k1)g(k2)

where p(h) is the microfacet distribution; g(k1) and g(k2)
are shadowing and masking terms; F(kh) is the Fresnel
term; and denotes the average over the distribution p.

We can rewrite Equation 3 in the following way:

p(h) = (k1, k2)  4g(k1)g(k2)                     (4)
                 h · n F(k · h)

   If we ignore shadowing and masking, the BRDF is pro-           Figure 11: Left: Brushed aluminium macro photograph.
portional to the microfacet distribution. We can then obtain      Right: deduced microfacet distribution (log plot).
a least-squares fit by averaging the estimate of p(h) for all
the pairs k1, k2 corresponding to the same h. In practice,        Figure 12: Left: Purple satin macro photograph with
we guess the Fresnel term through trial and error; however,       sketched double cones. Right: deduced microfacet distribu-
the Fresnel term can be also computed through optimization        tion (log plot).
in the outermost loop.
                                                                     The purple satin sample has an intriguing distribution: a
   The main difficulty, however, is the shadowing/masking         large density around two great circles that are symmetri-
function g which depends on the distribution p(h) itself.         cally slightly tilted from the vertical direction (Figure 12).
Fortunately, we observe that g is extremely smooth [APS00]        This type of distribution can be caused by symmetric cone
and we have found that an iterative approach works very           pairs. When we examine the macro photograph (Figure 12)
well. We start with a constant g, and we alternate the esti-      we note that the longest visible segments of thread are high
mation of p(h) using the current g and the computation of g
from p(h). In practice, about five or less iterations are suffi-
cient.

Observation on measured data We have used the above
method to compute a microfacet distribution for our four
measurements of anisotropic materials. Figure 9 and Fig-
ure 10 show comparisons between photographs of the mea-
surement cylinder and renderings using the estimated micro-
facet distribution and the Ashikhmin et al. microfacet-based
BRDF model. The renderings show good qualitative agree-
ment with the photographs and the shape of the highlights is

                                                                     c The Eurographics Association 2005.
                                      Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

in their middle and have a symmetrical slope that might be           We have also built a new setup for high resolution mea-
similar to a cone, as sketched on the right part of the image.    surement of anisotropic BRDFs using material strips on a
                                                                  rotating cylinder. We have used it to measure four typi-
Figure 13: Left: Red velvet macro photograph. Right: de-          cal anisotropic materials and have shown that only two of
duced microfacet distribution (log plot).                         them can be modeled by parametric models. Our fabric mea-
                                                                  surements exhibit a complexity that cannot be accounted
   The red velvet sample exhibits a secondary lobe in ad-         for by the elliptical functions used to introduce anisotropy
dition to the main lobe around the normal. This is mainly         in these models. Furthermore, we have shown how to es-
due to the dominant combing direction of the velvet sam-          timate a tabulated microfacet distribution from these mea-
ple. This shows an important type of anisotropy that cannot       surements, which yields good results with Ashikhmin et al.'s
be modeled by the standard analytical models. We should           microfacet-based BRDF generator. This model draws its ex-
also note that we are lacking measurements near extreme           pressive power from a general representation of microfacet
grazing angles, and therefore we may have missed impor-           distributions.
tant reflectance properties of the velvet in those directions.
In addition, it is difficult to enforce the exact combing direc-     There are several directions for future work. First, we ex-
tion uniformly on the entire piece of velvet. Small deviations    pect that a new set of basis functions, similar to the gen-
can be tolerated, however, as the average BRDF of velvet is       eralized cosine lobes, but expressed with the half-vector,
relatively low-frequency.                                         would yield improved fitting results with fewer number of
                                                                  lobes. Stark et al. [SAS05]'s barycentric coordinates are
6. Discussion                                                     also possible candidates. These basis functions should be
In this work we have analyzed the performance of several          reasonably inexpensive to compute and be flexible enough
analytical BRDF models by their ability to fit real BRDFs.        to represent complex reflectance phenomena, e.g., retro-
Our experimental results suggest that using a single specu-       reflection. Second, while our metric for BRDF fitting gives
lar lobe, the Cook-Torrance, Ashikhmin-Shirley and the He         reasonable results in most cases, it does not directly corre-
models perform well for most of the 100 isotropic BRDFs           spond to perceptually important differences. A perceptually-
in the data set. Moreover, our results show that for a num-       based metric would improve the visual quality of the fits
ber of materials, the fit quality is much improved when an        [PFG00, RWP95], especially when the fit is relatively poor
additional lobe is employed. This is mostly attributed to the     and different choices of approximation tradeoffs are present.
multiple layer finish on these materials.
                                                                     This paper has also highlighted that anisotropic materials
   Our study also illustrates that the difference between the     are difficult to model and acquire, and that much research
two ways of modeling the specular lobes is profound. The          effort is needed to improve the state of the art. The tabulated
H · N formulation naturally corresponds to the microfacet-        representation of microfacets is powerful but it requires high
based theory, and its viability is confirmed by the data set.     resolution measurements. In addition, it is not easy for an
Meanwhile, models based on the V · R lobes are visually           artist to edit these distributions. While the recovered distri-
inaccurate in a rendered scene. The fitting results of these      butions are more complex than elliptical shapes, they exhibit
models are systematically inferior to their counterparts. The     enough smoothness to leave hope for expressive and easy-
Lafortune model, though highly expressive with its ba-            to-manipulate parametric models. Finally, it is our belief that
sis of generalized cosine lobes, cannot accurately model          the most critical issue in reproducing real material is the ac-
real BRDFs with a single lobe. While the computation for          quisition itself. Our setup has allowed us to measure high
each generalized cosine lobe is cheaper relative to a Cook-       quality BRDFs, but it occupies an entire room and it takes
Torrance lobe, fitting more than a few of these lobes to mea-     several hours to acquire one BRDF. We believe that the de-
sured data is unstable.                                           velopment of a portable and easy-to-use reflectance scanner
                                                                  is a major challenge.

                                                                  Acknowledgement We thank Eric Chan, Jan Kautz, Jaakko
                                                                  Lehtinen, Daniel Vlasic and the anonymous reviewers for
                                                                  valuable feedback on this paper. This work was supported by
                                                                  an NSF CAREER award 0447561 Transient Signal Process-
                                                                  ing for Realistic Imagery, an NSF CISE Research Infrastruc-
                                                                  ture Award (EIA9802220) and the Singapore-MIT Alliance.

                                                                  References

                                                                  [APS00] ASHIKMIN M., PREMOZE S., SHIRLEY P.: A
                                                                     microfacet-based BRDF generator. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH 2000
                                                                     (2000), ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. 2, 8

c The Eurographics Association 2005.
                      Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

[AS00] ASHIKHMIN M., SHIRLEY P.: An anisotropic phong brdf            [MPBM03] MATUSIK W., PFISTER H., BRAND M., MCMIL-
   model. J. Graph. Tools 5, 2 (2000), 25­32. 3                          LAN L.: A data-driven reflectance model. ACM Trans. Graph.
                                                                         22, 3 (2003), 759­769. 1, 2
[Bli77] BLINN J. F.: Models of light reflection for computer syn-
   thesized pictures. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 1977 (1977),         [MRC86] MEYER G. W., RUSHMEIER H. E., COHEN M. F.,
   ACM Press, pp. 192­198. 3                                             GREENBERG D. P., TORRANCE K. E.: An experimental eval-
                                                                         uation of computer graphics imagery. ACM Trans. Graph. 5, 1
[Bor03] BORSHUKOV G.: Measured BRDF in film production-                  (1986), 30­50. 1
   Realistic cloth appearance for "The Matrix Reloaded". SIG-
   GRAPH 2003 Sketches and Applications Program (2003). 2             [MWL99] MARSCHNER S., WESTIN S., LAFORTUNE E.,
                                                                         TORRANCE K., GREENBERG D.: Image-based BRDF measure-
[Cor] Cornell  Light  Measurement  Laboratory:                           ment including human skin. In Rendering Techniques '99 (1999),
                                                                         pp. 139­152. 1, 2
http://www.graphics.cornell.edu/research/measure/. 1
                                                                      [Nis] NIST reference reflectometer: STARR facility.
[CT81] COOK R. L., TORRANCE K. E.: A reflectance model for               http://physics.nist.gov/. 1
   computer graphics. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 1981 (1981),
   ACM Press, pp. 307­316. 1, 3, 5, 6                                 [ON94] OREN M., NAYAR S. K.: Generalization of lambert's
                                                                         reflectance model. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH 1994 (1994), ACM
[DNGK97] DANA K. J., NAYAR S. K., GINNEKEN B. V.,                        Press, pp. 239­246. 2
   KOENDERINK J. J.: Reflectance and texture of real-world sur-
   faces. In Proceedings of the 1997 Conference on Computer Vi-       [PFG00] PELLACINI F., FERWERDA J. A., GREENBERG D. P.:
   sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR '97) (1997), IEEE Com-             Toward a psychophysically-based light reflection model for im-
   puter Society, p. 151. 2                                              age synthesis. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH 2000 (2000), ACM
                                                                         Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., pp. 55­64. 9
[Due04] DUER A.: On the Ward model for global illumination.
   Submitted for review, Sept. 2004. 3                                [Pho75] PHONG B. T.: Illumination for computer generated pic-
                                                                         tures. Communications of ACM 18, 6 (1975), 311­317. 6
[DvGNK99] DANA K. J., VAN GINNEKEN B., NAYAR S. K.,
   KOENDERINK J. J.: Reflectance and texture of real-world sur-       [Rus98] RUSINKIEWICZ S. M.: New change of variables for
   faces. ACM Trans. Graph. 18, 1 (1999). 1                              efficient BRDF representation. In Rendering Techniques '98
                                                                         (1998), Drettakis G., Max N., (Eds.), Eurographics, Springer-
[FGR93] FOURNIER A., GUNAWAN A. S., ROMANZIN C.:                         Verlag Wien New York, pp. 11­22. 7
   Common illumination between real and computer generated
   scenes. In Graphics Interface '93 (May 1993). 1                    [RWP95] RUSHMEIER H., WARD G., PIATKO C., SANDERS
                                                                         P., RUST B.: Comparing real and synthetic images: Some
[HP03] HAN J. Y., PERLIN K.: Measuring bidirectional tex-                ideas about metrics. In Eurographics Rendering Workshop 1995
   ture reflectance with a kaleidoscope. ACM Trans. Graph. 22,           (1995). 1, 9
   3 (2003), 741­748. 1
                                                                      [SAS05] STARK M. M., ARVO J., SMITS B.: Barycentric pa-
[HTSG91] HE X. D., TORRANCE K. E., SILLION F. X.,                        rameterizations for isotropic brdfs. IEEE Transactions on Visu-
   GREENBERG D. P.: A comprehensive physical model for light             alization and Computer Graphics 11, 2 (2005), 126­138. 7, 9
   reflection. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 1991 (1991), ACM
   Press, pp. 175­186. 1, 3                                           [Sch94] SCHLICK C.: An inexpensive BRDF model for
                                                                         physically-based rendering. Computer Graphics Forum 13, 3
[KBMK01] KOUDELKA M., BELHUMEUR P., MAGDA S.,                            (1994), 233­246. 5
   KRIEGMAN D.: Image-based modeling and rendering of sur-
   faces with arbitrary BRDFs. In Proc. of Computer Vision and        [SHSL97] SHIRLEY P., HU H., SMITS B., LAFORTUNE E.: A
   Pattern Recognition (2001). 1                                         practitioners' assessment of light reflection models. In Proceed-
                                                                         ings of Pacific Graphics 97 (1997). 1
[KvDS96] KOENDERINK J. J., VAN DOORN A. J., STAVRIDI
   M.: Bidirectional reflection distribution function expressed in    [SSK03] SATTLER M., SARLETTE R., KLEIN R.: Efficient and
   terms of surface scattering modes. In Proc. of the 4th European       realistic visualization of cloth. In Proceedings of the 14th Euro-
   Conference on Computer Vision-Volume II (1996), Springer-             graphics workshop on Rendering (2003), Eurographics Associa-
   Verlag, pp. 28­39. 2                                                  tion, pp. 167­177. 1

[LFTG97] LAFORTUNE E. P. F., FOO S.-C., TORRANCE K. E.,               [SWI97] SATO Y., WHEELER M. D., IKEUCHI K.: Object shape
   GREENBERG D. P.: Non-linear approximation of reflectance              and reflectance modeling from observation. In Proc. of SIG-
   functions. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH 1997 (1997), ACM                      GRAPH 1997 (1997), ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing
   Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., pp. 117­126. 2, 3, 4, 5          Co., pp. 379­387. 1

[LKG01] LENSCH H. P. A., KAUTZ J., GOESELE M., HEI-                   [War92] WARD G.: Measuring and modeling anisotropic reflec-
   DRICH W., SEIDEL H.-P.: Image-based reconstruction of spa-            tion. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH 1992 (1992), ACM Press. 1, 3
   tially varying materials. In Rendering Techniques 2001: 12th Eu-
   rographics Workshop on Rendering (June 2001), pp. 103­114. 1       [YDMH99] YU Y., DEBEVEC P., MALIK J., HAWKINS T.: In-
                                                                         verse global illumination: recovering reflectance models of real
[LKK00] LU R., KAPPERS A., KOENDERINK J.: Optical prop-                  scenes from photographs. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH 1999 (1999),
   erties (Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Functions) of shot     ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. 1
   fabric. Applied Optics 39, 31 (Nov. 2000), 5785­5795. 2

[Mar98] MARSCHNER S.: Inverse Rendering for Computer
   Graphics. PhD thesis, Cornell University, 1998. 1

                                                                          c The Eurographics Association 2005.
                                              Ngan et al. / Experimental Analysis of BRDF Models

                           He

                           Cook-Torrance

                           Lafortune

                     0.5   Ward

                           Blinn-Phong

                     0

log(Err/Max Albedo)  -0.5

                     -1

                     -1.5

                     -2

                           10             20  30  40  50        60                                70  80  90  100

                                                      Material

Figure 14: The normalized fitting errors (logarithmic scale) of five analytic models to our isotropic data set of 100 BRDFs. The
BRDFs are sorted in the errors of the Lafortune model (Red) for visualization purpose.

c The Eurographics Association 2005.
