Strings and Things
Search
Home
Forum
Index
Puppet Construction
Puppet Performance
Puppet Chit Chat
Members
Directory
Archive
Forum
Gallery
Log In
Register
Archive Index
Puppet Construction
Puppet Building
Strings and Things
Strings and Things
Posted by kilimangnome on May 04, 2010
Hi guys, I've lurked for a while now and am in the process of building my first marionette. I was just wondering what kinds of strings to use. Iv'e heard to avoid fishing line as the elasticity makes it loose its proportions. What do you all use? What is the thick black thread i see on most marionettes?
Re: Strings and Things
Posted by Monkey on May 05, 2010
I use a very thick thread I picked up at an auto re-upholstery shop. It comes on a cone like serger thread-Steve
Re: Strings and Things
Posted by Abdolos on May 05, 2010
A lot of people use carpet thread, which is probably what you're seeing, but I like braided nylon ice fishing line, 25 lb. test.  It doesn't seem to distort under stage lights, and you can use a lighter to melt the frayed ends together, which makes it easier to thread through a small hole.
Re: Strings and Things
Posted by
Shawn
on May 05, 2010
Braided nylon fishing line.
It is what I have always used.  I use anywhere from 10lb on up depending on how heavy the puppet is.
Re: Strings and Things
Posted by kilimangnome on May 05, 2010
SO nylon fishing line isn't like normal fishing line im guessing from what you guys have said. Well, thanks alot, depending on price I might try both and see which i like best, and of course, Ill post pics.
Re: Strings and Things
Posted by Abdolos on May 06, 2010
To be accurate, "fishing line" is an umbrella term that covers several kinds of line for fishing.  This is from wikipedia:
Early developments
The earliest fishing lines were made from leaves or plant stalk (Parker 2002). Later lines were often constructed from horse hair or silk thread, with catgut leaders. From the 1850s, modern industrial machinery was employed to fashion fishing lines in quantity. Most of these lines were made from linen, silk, and more rarely cotton or flax, sometimes with a waterproofing compound added during line manufacture.[1]
Modern lines
Modern fishing lines intended for spinning, spin cast, or bait casting reels are almost entirely made from artificial substances, including nylon, polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, and called fluorocarbon), polyethylene, Dacron and Dyneema (UHMWPE). The most common type is monofilament, made of a single strand. Fishermen often use monofilament because of its buoyant characteristics and its ability to stretch under load. Its ablility to stretch has a huge advantage over the early developments as it prevents the rod from being ripped out of the users hands when given a sudden pull. Recently, other alternatives to standard nylon monofilament lines have been introduced made of copolymers or fluorocarbon, or a combination of the two materials. Fluorocarbon fishing line is made of the fluoropolymer PVDF and it is valued for its refractive index, which is similar to that of water, making it less visible to fish. Fluorocarbon is also a more dense material, and therefore, is not nearly as buoyant as monofilament. Anglers often utilize fluorocarbon when they need their baits to stay closer to the bottom without the use of heavy sinkers. There are also braided fishing lines, cofilament and thermally fused lines, also known as 'superlines' for their small diameter, lack of stretch, and great strength relative to standard nylon monofilament lines. Both braided and thermally fused 'superlines' are now readily available.
The nylon fishing line you've been warned of is the monofilament.  Braided nylon line doesn't distort so much, and won't hold a kink.  But they're both made of nylon, and neither of them is, strictly speaking, "normal fishing line."
Re: Strings and Things
Posted by Jorge on May 06, 2010
I do not which is the name in English, but the literal translation of what I use is "waxed thread": you can find it in leather craft stores It is usually employed to sew leather. you can find it in black or white colours
Re: Strings and Things
Posted by Rcdspoon on May 08, 2010
I use brown upholstery thread for my marionettes. which is 100% nylon.
Which I like for my more light weight puppets.
Spoon
Re: Strings and Things
Posted by johian on May 09, 2010
Posted by: Jorge on May 06, 2010
I do not which is the name in English, but the literal translation of what I use is "waxed thread": you can find it in leather craft stores It is usually employed to sew leather. you can find it in black or white colours
I also use waxed thread... it's very strong and it don't change.
Johan
Loading
No More Post
Error
×
Loading
© 2000 - 2026 Puppets And Stuff
Privacy Policy & TOS