Skip to content
MENU
Search
Search for:
How To
Submenu Toggle
Arm&Rod Puppets
Latex Puppets
Ventriloquist
Sock Puppets
Hand Puppets
VIDEOS
Puppet Patterns
Puppet Making Tools & Materials
Puppets For Sale
Articles
Privacy Policy
Puppet Ministry Resources
BLOG
About Us
Welcome To Puppet Building World
Sitemap
PUPPETRY VIDEOS
Pot Belly Puppet Body Pattern
Puppet Hand Pattern
Terms and Conditions
Be sure to check our other articles and patterns.
READ MORE
What Type Of String To Use For Marionette Puppets
Written by
admin
in
Uncategorized
Let’s talk about string. The most common question I get asked concerning building marionettes, is what type of string to use for string marionettes. And the answer is whatever string you have, but for best results, it’s often recommended that you use braided deep sea fishing line.
Deep-sea fishing lines can come in multiple strands, meaning that there are multiple fibers in one string and they’re braided so that it cuts down on fraying when you cut it a brand,
A very popular line for puppets is
Hercules fishing line
.
Another brand that you’ll hear puppeteers talk about is Dacron. I have some Dacron, too.
Braided fishing lines come in multiple pound tests. Thirty pound test works great aand is thin, but even 100 pound test works good.
Marionette strung with braided line.
You wouldn’t necessarily use this for stringing. I use this for internal joint strings in the Dacron brand. It’s a little thicker. The string brands are different levels of strength, depending on what pound they say they are.
I found best results of buying different spools and finding which one you like the best. I’m a big believer of whatever string is right for the puppet should be the string you should use.
If it’s a lightweight puppet, you want thin small strings. If it’s a heavy puppet, of course, you want heavy, thick strings to be able to hold it up.
A school of thought is that the strings are supposed to disappear as much as possible. Puppeteers do use clear fishing wire, although it does reflect light. So sometimes it draws more attention than just the plain black does not only is deep sea fishing line used for string puppets, but you can also use it for rod puppets.
Braided fishing line comes in multiple colors. I always buy black, but you can buy neon or bright colors. And I’ve seen puppeteers use the bright-colored fishing line if there’s an internal mechanism string so that when you work on the puppet, it’s easier to see.
And then likewise, if you want the strings to disappear, the idea is to use black string. At times, you’ll want a string that can slide through the screw eyes like on your running hamstring. So you don’t want it to catch or fray over time and break.
Even though all strings are prone to get broken, this deep-sea fishing line tends to last a lot longer against fraying. The deep sea fishing line comes in multiple strands, sometimes four strands or eight strands. I don’t find a difference much between how many strands are in there. I just go for overall strength.
In addition, I always put glue on my knots with deep-sea fishing line. Sometimes by design, it’s kind of slippery. So when you glue the knots, they will hold.
I use
Duco cement
on my knots. The great thing about Duco cement is when you glue the knot, you can also, if you need to take, a needle and undo the knot. So it helps hold it, but it is not totally a permanent situation.
Other than deep-sea fishing line. I’ve had success using heavy-duty sewing thread. I’ve also heard of puppeteers using beading thread or upholstery thread. So it’s really just up to you as the puppeteer to decide what kind of string is best for your puppet.
There you have it. Those are the types of strings I and many others use for marionettes.
Find Hercules braided deep sea fishing line for puppet string:
https://amzn.to/3lMIL57
Dacron Fishing line, 30lb:
https://amzn.to/2ZoIPRa
Share this:
Share on X (Opens in new window)
X
Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Facebook
Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
Pinterest
Like this:
Like
Loading…
Post
Save
Email
Share
admin
What Type Of String To Use For Marionette Puppets
link to Why Kids Put Their Phones Down for a Puppet
Why Kids Put Their Phones Down for a Puppet
By Zack Buchman, Guest Writer
A little while back, New York State needed a mascot who could get millions of students excited about putting their phones away during class. They came to us at Furry...
Continue Reading
link to Crafting Puppet Faces That Truly Express A Character's Personality & Mood
Crafting Puppet Faces That Truly Express A Character's Personality & Mood
Thank you for being part of our creative community. One of the most rewarding challenges in puppet making is crafting faces that truly express a character’s personality and mood. This week, I want...
Continue Reading
ABOUT ME
Dennis & Family
I am Dennis
Regling. I am an author, educator, and puppet maker & performer. I have been performing with puppets for 14 years. I perform both as a ventriloquist and with my family with a stage.
I have been building puppets since 2015 and started this blog to share what I have learned, both from tutorials and from trial and error.
Possum Woods Puppets is the name of both my puppet building business and our puppet team. As a family, we present ministry programs in churches.
Turning Puppets Into Profit
Dennis is the author of “Turning Puppets Into Profit: How To Build A Successful Puppet Business,” teaching puppet builders and puppeteers how to make money with their interest in puppets.
LEGAL STUFF
Possum Woods Puppets and PuppetBuildingWorld.com is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for website owners to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to amazon.com, audible.com, and any other website that may be affiliated with Amazon Service LLC Associates Program. As an Amazon Associate [I or we] earn from qualifying purchases.
Cannot load blog information at this time.
Terms and Conditions
© 2026 Copyright Puppet Building World
%d