Measurement of resistance coefficients of pendulum motion
                       with balls of various sizes

                              Kyung-Ryul Lee and Young-Gu Ju*

          Department of Physics Education, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566

In order to obtain the damping and resistance coefficients of a pendulum, we constructed an
optical system containing a photogate for measuring the speed of the pendulum at the lowest
point of motion. The photogate consisted of a photoresistor, a laser, a mechanical body, and a
pendulum ball. A 3D printer was used to produce the mechanical body and pendulum balls of
various sizes. Furthermore, we used Arduino to automate measurement of the speed at the lowest
point of motion and increase the precision. We found that the resistance coefficient was
proportional to the size of the balls, regardless of the ball mass, in agreement with the drag
equation for a small Reynolds number.

PACS number:
Keywords: Arduino, 3D printer, damping coefficient, resistance coefficient, simple pendulum, fluid
dynamics
                                        I. INTRODUCTION

A pendulum motion is one of the most common topics in physics textbooks, especially for
explaining Newtonian mechanics, including the concepts of periodic motion, gravity, oscillation,
and friction.1­3 For small-angle oscillations, the pendulum motion reduces to a harmonic oscillator
problem. Many theoretical and experimental studies related to simple pendulums have been
conducted to investigate its nonlinear effects and improve the precision of measurements.4_6

  The pendulum motion can be described by a sinusoidal function of time if there is no air
resistance. The frictional force associated with air resistance causes damping of the pendulum
motion, which can be described by the same equation used for a damped oscillator. Since the air
resistance is generally not sufficiently large to cause overdamping or critical damping, a damped
pendulum can be considered as an underdamped oscillator, which has an amplitude that decays
exponentially in time with a damping coefficient.1,2 The damping coefficient is equal to the
resistance coefficient of the friction term in the equation of motion, divided by two times the mass.
In most textbooks, this friction term is assumed to be the product of the resistance coefficient and
the velocity of the bob or ball of the pendulum. Since air friction is a type of drag force, it should
depend on the size of the pendulum ball. It is interesting to investigate the dependence of the
resistance coefficient on the size of the pendulum ball.

  In this study, we measured the damping and resistance coefficients for pendulum balls of
various sizes. We examined the dependence of the resistance coefficient on the ball size and
examined the compatibility of the results with the drag equation, which is frequently used to
describe the air resistance acting on the motion of spherical objects.7,8

   Another salient feature of this research is the achievement of high accuracy in and simplification
of the pendulum experiment for educational purposes. We employed a microcontroller-based
laboratory method9 and used Arduino,10 which is one of the most popular open-source electronics
platform that offers easy-to-use hardware and software. This electronics platform has
considerable advantages in terms of cost, availability, and ease of learning,11,12 which are
especially helpful for teaching students basic experiments such as an experiment for
understanding pendulum motion. Arduino can be used to automate data acquisition and increase
the measurement accuracy by sampling more data with ease.

  In addition to Arduino, we employed a 3D printer to fabricate the mechanical structure of a
photogate and balls of various sizes. A 3D printer are cheap and easily available in secondary
schools. The combination of Arduino and a 3D printer can help students perform many basic
experiments without having to purchase expensive instruments, and provide students with an
opportunity to learn coding.

                                             II. THEORY

   According to fluid dynamics, the frictional force (or drag) for a spherical object in motion
depends on the properties of fluid and on the size, shape, and speed of the object. This
relationship is described by the drag equation, which is expressed as Eq. (1), where Fd, CD  A,
and v are the drag force, drag coefficient, density of the fluid, cross-sectional area, and velocity
of the object relative to the fluid, respectively.7,8

  =  1    2  (1)
     2

In addition, CD depends on the Reynolds number, which can be derived using Eq. (2), where L is
a characteristic diameter or linear dimension of the object such as the diameter of a sphere and
 is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid.

  =  ||      (2)
       

If the Reynolds number Re is about 1200 or less, the drag coefficient CD is roughly inversely
proportional to it. 7,13 This means that the drag force is proportional to the velocity as in Eq. (3),
where c is the resistance coefficient.:

 = -cv       (3)

Therefore, for a pendulum motion moving with a small Reynolds number, the frictional force Fd
due to air resistance is proportional to the velocity of the object as shown in Eq. (3) where the
resistance coefficient c is independent of the velocity, but is proportional to the size of a sphere.
In our experiment, the measured Re was between 296 and 927, which is less than 1200: the drag
was thus considered proportional to the velocity as in Eq. (3).

   Using the drag equation, the following differential equation for pendulum motion can be
obtained:

 +  +  = 0,  (4)

where m, c, g, and l are the mass, resistance coefficient, standard gravity, and pendulum length,
respectively.1,2 For a small-angle oscillation, this expression can be approximated as
 +  + (/) = 0.      (5)

The solution of this differential equation has the form of Eq. (6), where , , and  are the
maximum angle, damping coefficient, and angular frequency, respectively. Furthermore, the
angular frequency can be expressed in terms of the standard gravity and pendulum length, as
shown in Eq. (7). The damping coefficient is related to the resistance coefficient according to Eq.
(8):

() = -()            (6)

 =                  (7)

 =                  (8)
2

The expression for the angular velocity of the pendulum ball [Eq. (9)] can be obtained by
differentiating Eq. (6) with respect to time:

() = (--() - -()).  (9)

At the lowest point of motion, () becomes zero and () becomes ±1, and the
following expression can be obtained:

() = 0 = -().       (10)
Substituting Eq. (10) in Eq. (9) gives

 () = (0 - -()) = ±- = ±- .                   (11)

By multiplying both sides of Eq. (11) by , we can obtain the following expressions for the linear
velocity and pendulum speed at the lowest point:

 () = ±-,                               (12)
|()| = -,                               (13)
 = .                                    (14)

The speed at the lowest point is also the maximum speed of the pendulum in any given period of
motion. The speed of the pendulum decreases exponentially with time, and the decay constant
equals the damping constant of the motion. Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of Eq. (13)
gives

|()| = - + ().                          (15)

When |()| is plotted as a function of , the slope of the line corresponds to the damping
coefficient with the opposite sign. Thus, the damping coefficients of pendulum motion can be
obtained from the measured speed of the ball at the lowest point.
                                        III. EXPERIMENTS

In order to measure the speed of a pendulum ball at its lowest point, we fabricated a photogate
using Arduino and a 3D printer in the laboratory. The photogate consisted of a diode laser, a
photoresistor, a mechanical structure for holding the two devices, and an Arduino circuit, as
shown in Fig. 1. We used Cubify Invent as the computer-aided design (CAD) software to design
the photogate body and pendulum balls. The photogate body was U-shaped with two holes at the
ends [Fig. 1(a)] for holding the diode laser and photoresistor. The pendulum ball swung between
these two devices blocking the laser beam and decreasing the laser light arriving at the
photoresistor.

   The photoresistor formed the upper part of a voltage divider with a fixed resistor on a
breadboard. The upper and lower ends of the voltage divider were connected to the 5 V pin and
0 V (GND) pin of an Arduino board, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c). The center of the
voltage divider was tied to an analog input labeled "A2" on the Arduino board. When the laser
beam was not blocked, the light reached the photoresistor and decreased its resistance, thereby
reducing the voltage drop across the photoresistor; this caused the voltage at the middle point of
the voltage divider to remain high. As the ball began to block the laser beam, the process was
reversed: the voltage at the middle point and A2 pin of the Arduino board decreased. In short, a
lower light intensity at the sensor resulted in a lower voltage at the Arduino input and vice versa.
Thus, the voltage of the photosensor indicated whether the ball was blocking the laser beam.

   Since the Arduino board could check the sensor very frequently and measure time with an
accuracy of a tenth of a millisecond, we could accurately measure the time span between the
instant when the ball began blocking the laser beam and when the blocking ended (i.e., when the
pendulum was at its lowest point). The speed of the ball was the diameter of the ball divided by
the blockage time span. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2. The ball was suspended by
two strings instead of a single string to prevent the rotation of the plane of the pendulum motion
during the measurements.

(a)  (b)

                                                             (c)
FIG. 1. Photogate fabricated using the 3D printer and Arduino: (a) a schematic of an assembly
      view of the photogate body and photographs of (b) the photogate comprising the laser,
photoresistor, and Arduino circuit and (c) the detailed wiring of the divider with the photoresistor

                                 and a resistor connected to the Arduino board.

                  FIG. 2. Photograph of the setup for the simple pendulum experiment.

   Pendulum balls of various sizes were designed and fabricated using CAD and the 3D printer,
and they are shown in Fig. 3. Basically, a single spherical metal ball, shown in Fig. 3(c), was used
throughout the experiment with strings of a fixed length. The ball was enclosed by plastic shells
of different sizes to vary the bob size. This approach eliminated possible changes in the
experimental conditions such as the length of strings. The plastic shell consisted of two halves
that could be attached to each other with two pins. A half-shell had two holes on the flat side for
holding the pins, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The plastic shell also had space at its top for two strings
to pass through. The outer diameters of the spherical shells were 18.7, 24.1, 30.0, and 36.0 mm.
Balls with five different sizes, including the metal ball (which had a diameter of 11.5 mm), were
used in the pendulum experiment.
(a)  (b)

                                                              (c)
                                        FIG. 3. Balls used in the experiment
(a) the 3D design of a plastic ball and photographs of (b) plastic balls of various sizes produced
           by the 3D printer and (c) the metal ball that was inserted into the plastic shells.

    The measurement of pendulum motion required the programming of the Arduino board to acquire
time data at the exact instants when the ball began to block the laser path and when the laser path
was unblocked. The program used in the experiment is shown in Fig. 4. It enabled the board to check
whether the voltage at the A2 pin was high or low. If the voltage was greater than 2 V, then the
program recognized the state as HIGH. Otherwise, the state was identified as LOW. The HIGH and
LOW states corresponded to high and low light intensities at the photoresistor, respectively. Since
the voltage input at the A2 pin was digitized into an integer value from 0 to 1023, the threshold value
in the code was set to 400. The measured timing data were stored in the memory until the number
of data reached 100, whereupon the board sent the stored data in a single batch through serial
communication to the main computer to prevent unnecessary and irregular latency in the
communication between data acquisition intervals.

  The clock frequency of the Arduino board was 16 MHz, and the number of coding lines in the
execution loop was less than 10. Therefore, theoretically, the time taken to check the photosensor
voltage should be less than a microsecond. However, the time to execute a loop was measured to
be about 130 s. It emerged that reading the voltage from an analog input was relatively slower than
the execution of the other instructions and consumed most of the execution time. Since the laser
path was blocked for a time span of a few tens of milliseconds, the relative error in the time
measurement was on the order of 1/100 or less. The relative error in the measurement of the ball
diameter was on the order of 1/1000 or less since the diameter was about a few tens of millimeters
and the precision of the vernier calipers was 0.01 mm. Therefore, the precision of the time span was
critical to the measurement precision for the speed of the ball.
                 FIG. 4. Arduino program used for time measurement by the photogate.

   The experiment was performed as follows. First, the ball was pulled to a distance of 10 cm.
After the activation of the Arduino board, the ball was released and allowed to oscillate. After the
pendulum passed the optical sensor 100 times, Arduino sent the data to a notebook that displayed
the information on its serial monitor. The data from the serial monitor was transferred to a
spreadsheet program for additional analysis. The lengths of the strings were 50 cm. The
experiment was conducted five times under the same conditions for every ball. In order to reduce
the error, we took adequate care to ensure that there was no initial speed at the specified width
of swing when releasing the pendulum ball. We used a ruler to stop a ball before commencement
of its motion. Since the ruler was fastened by a screw, loosening the screw allowed the ball to
move. This method helped initiate the motion under the same conditions in terms of the width of
swing and initial speed.

                              IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Using the fabricated photogate, we measured the speeds of the balls of various sizes during
pendulum motion. In the experiment, the change in the speed of the oscillating bob with time was
measured. From the rate of reduction of the speed, the damping and resistance coefficients could
be determined. A change in the ball diameter resulted in changes in the resistance and damping
coefficients, which were obtained from the speed of the pendulum at its lowest point. From plots
of |()| as a function of time, the slope and damping coefficient were obtained using Eq.
(15). Plots of |()| vs. time for the various ball sizes are shown in Fig. 5.

                                                              (a)
(b)
(c)
                                                           (d)

                                                           (e)
FIG. 5. Plot of  || as a function of time for the simple pendulum motion of the balls of

                various sizes: (a) 11.5, (b) 18.7, (c) 24.1, (d) 30.0, and (e) 36.0 mm.
The resistance coefficient was obtained from 2 by using Eq. (8). The damping and
resistance coefficients measured for the various ball sizes are presented in Table I. As the ball
size increased, the resistance coefficient increased. However, the damping coefficient decreased
with an increase in the ball size. This implies that when the size of the ball increased, the increase in
c was less than that in the mass of the ball.

TABLE I. Measured damping and resistance coefficients for various ball sizes.

Ball radius  Mass (g)        Damping           Resistance
   (mm)                coefficient  (1/s)  coefficient c (kg/s)

5.75         6.36      0.0096              1.2 × 10-4
9.35         8.33      0.0086              1.4 × 10-4
12.05        12.35     0.0070              1.8 × 10-4
15.00        16.28     0.0067              2.2 × 10-4
18.00        23.48     0.0056              2.6 × 10-4

   A plot of the experimentally observed resistance coefficient as a function of the ball radius is
shown in Fig. 6. A linear equation fits the experimental data, except for the smallest ball radius.
In order to determine the linear relationship between the resistance coefficient and the ball radius,
we assumed c to be given by

              = .                          (16)

Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of this equation yields the following equation:
  =   +   .  (17)

   Therefore, the slope of the plot of   as a function of   is the exponent n in Eq. (16).
The value of n obtained from the logarithm plot was 0.975, which is close to 1. This indicated that
the resistance coefficient was linearly proportional to the ball radius. The first data point was an
outlier to the fitted curve, probably because other friction mechanisms may have come into play
for the small ball radius and small friction. Furthermore, the y-intercept of the fitted curve in Fig. 6
is close to zero, which also indicates conformance of the experimental data with the drag equation
for small Reynolds numbers.

FIG. 6. Plot of the resistance coefficient c vs. the ball radius R.
                                           FIG. 7. Plot of   vs. ln R.

                                        V. CONCLUSIONS

We fabricated a photogate using Arduino and a 3D printer to measure the resistance coefficient
of a simple pendulum. Pendulum balls of various sizes were fabricated by inserting a metal ball
in 3D-printed plastic shells of various sizes. These balls of various sizes were used to determine
the relationship between the resistance coefficient and ball size. The lab-made photogate and
Arduino board could measure the time span of the blocking of the laser path by a ball with
sufficient accuracy. From the measured time spans, the speed of the balls at their lowest point,
which was expected to decrease with the damping coefficient because of air friction, was
determined.

   The diameters of the balls used in the experiment were 11.5, 18.7, 24.1, 30.0, and 36.0 mm.
The experimentally measured damping coefficients for these balls were 0.0096, 0.0086, 0.0070,
0.0067, and 0.0056 1/s, respectively. The resistance coefficients for the balls were obtained by
multiplying the damping coefficient by two times the mass of the balls, and the values obtained
were 1.2 × 10-4, 1.4 × 10-4, 1.8 × 10-4, 2.2 × 10-4, and 2.6 × 10-4 kg/s, respectively.

   From a plot of the resistance coefficient as a function of the ball radius, the linear relationship
between these parameters was obtained and it was observed to be in agreement with the drag
equation for small Reynolds numbers. Although the smallest diameter was an outlier to the fitted
curve, the logarithmic plot of the resistance coefficients against the ball radius also confirmed that
the relationship between the resistance coefficient and the ball radius was linear, in accordance
with the drag equation. Thus, measuring the damping and resistance coefficients for pendulum
motion was possible using a 3D printer and Arduino. Furthermore, examination of the variation of
the resistance coefficient with the ball radius showed that the resistance coefficient was
proportional to the ball diameter, in agreement with the drag equation for small Reynolds
numbers.

   This study shows the possibility of designing physics experiments based on Arduino and a 3D
printer for educating students in multi-disciplinary approaches such as those pertaining to
mechanics, optics, electronics, and software coding. Furthermore, such experiments cover many
aspects of a discipline, such as oscillation, damping, and fluid mechanics. Our results show how
multidisciplinary education can be provided to students and educators in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
                            REFERENCES

* ygju@knu.ac.kr

[1] Mechanics, third ed., Keith R. Symon, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1984, Reading,

Massachusetts, p.212, p.40

[2] Analytical mechanics, 7th ed., Grant R. Fowles and George L. Cassiday, (Brooks/Cole-

Thomson Learning, Pacific Grove, 2005), p.92, p.109

[3] College physics 6th Ed., Ryamond A. Serway and Jerry S. Faughn, (Brooks/Cole-Thomson

Learning, Pacific Grove, 2003) p.404, p.407

[4] L. P. Fulcher and B. F. Davis, Am. J. Physics, 44, 51-55 (1976)

[5] R. A. Nelson and M. G. Olsson, Am. J. Physics, 54, 112-121 (1986)

[6] F. M. S. Lima and P. Arun, Am. J. Physics, 74, 892-895 (2006)

[7] P. Mohazzabi and S. P. Shankar, J. of Applied Math. and Phys., 5, 122-124 (2017)

[8] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drag_(physics) (accessed Jan. 9, 2020)

[9] Neha Aggarwal, Nitin Verma and P Arun, Eur. J. Phys. 26 517-523 (2005)

[10] http://arduino.cc/ (accessed Nov., 15, 2019)

[11] F. Bouquet, J. Bobroff, M. Fuchs-Gallezot, L. Maurines, "Project-based physics labs using

low-cost open-source hardware", American Journal of Physics 85, 216-222 (2017)

[12] A M B Goncalves, C R Cena and D F Bozano, Phys. Educ. 52 043002 (2017)

[13] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reynolds_number(accessed Jan. 9, 2020)
