MARIONETTES * )a *
"Barnacle Bill the Sailor"
  ow To Make and 

   perate Marionettes 


    Including Facts About The Pixie
                        arionettes

                                      pY

     JOHN c:~ A U S T M A N

MANAGER OF THE PIXIE MARIONETTES

       lllustrated By The Author

                  FIRST EDITION

                                 . ..
COPYRIGHT 1934 BY JOHN C . FAUSTMAN

                PRINTED IN U. S. A.
!  -FOREWORD-

            This little booklet was written for the benefit of

       those interested in learning about the fascinating
       subject of marionetets. The writer has not attempt

       ed to go technically into the more complex details
       of marionette construction; rather, this book was

       designed to give beginners information as to the
       fundamentals of puppetry. It is the writer's sincere
J hope that this booklet will serve its purpose, and he
       cannot help but wish the reader the best of sucess in
       his ventures,

                              --JOHN C. FAUSTMAN. 


       1934.
TO MY MOTHER 

          MARIONETTES

   What a queer, fascinating little creature is the

I  marionette! People of all ages and races have been

   drawn into his spell throughout the centuries. To

   our reckoning, the marionette dates back to the

   tombs of the ancient Egyptians, for it is there that
   these figures have been found. Punch and Judy. a
   pair familiar to all of us have tantalized Europe for

i many hundreds of years.

   The term "marionette" originated from the

   French, meaning "little Mary," who undoubtedly
   was the main figure in most of the plays of that

   time.

   There are three distinct types of puppets. The

        first, and perhaps one of the oldest, is the Chinese
       rod and shadow puppet. They are manipulated by
       means of rods attached to the main parts of the

1

       body and are moved behind a lighted screen, giving
       a beautiful color shadow effect. The second type of

J, puppet is that constructed of a head and hollow cloth

        body, into which the hand of the operator is slipped.

P

    -2-


    'This class is opearted from below and to it belonq
    h n c h and Judy.

        The third class of puppet, qualified as the true
    marionette is opearted from above by means of
    strings or threads. T o this type belong the "Pix
    ies." Marionettes originated in Europe and because
    of their interesting merits, now have a good start in
    America. At the present time there are several com
    plete companies that often tour the United States.

        Needless to say, there is a peculiar spell that
    comes over the puppet enthusiast, and after making

    only one of these little figures one finds it a diti'icuii
    matter not to continue. The perseverant worker
    will find unlimited opportunities in this field not

    merely lor amusement, but as a profitable means as
    well.

,
  This article is designed for beginners, and the

    most simple and practical methods, written so that

    all can understand them are to be given. The fol
    lowing plans are for a marionette 12 inches high.

                  The Head (See drawing I)

        The head seems to give the majority of begin
    ners the most trouble, so we will first learn how it is
    to be made. Carving the head from wood is a dis
    couraging task which not only requires skill in wood
       would suggest that the beginner purchase a small
       can of plastic wood at the hardware or paint store
       and modeling an egg shaped head about three inches

Q


       high including neck, form only the nose and eye
       sockets instead of attempting any detail. After the
       fiber has dried, the head may be painted with either
       water colors or oil pants to give it the desired fea
       tures. A very small screw eye must be inserted at
       the base of the neck and also where either ear
       should be, after the wood is hard. The one in the
       neck serves as a means of attaching the head to the
       body, while those at either ear are for attaching the
       head strings. Hair may be made from yarn or pm
       chased from the theatrical store. T o improve its
       appearance, the entire head may be shellaced after
       the paint has dried.

                Another Method o Making Heads

            Instead of using the foregoing method, the mar
       ionette enthusiast may make his heads from buck-
       ram, a heavy cloth material that contains a great
       deal of starch, which can be purchased at the hat
       shop. To start with, model the head in modeling
       clay, and proceed to wet the piece of buckram which
       is to be placed over the face of the model. With

I
                              -4-


straight pins, pin part of the cloth over the face, r,
and star+working the buckram into the crevices and
features with a hairpin or other suitable tool. After
completing the job to your own satisfaction, and so

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (

that the buckram is smooth, and has no wrinkles
upon its surface, set the head and mask aside to dry.
Do not set it near to intense heat, however, as the
modeling clay is apt to melt. As was previously
stated, the buckram contains a great deal of starch.
After dry, remove the buckram and you have a SCIL'
mask of the face. Carefully shellac the mask SO that
it will keep its shape. W h e n the shellac is dry,
the mask may be painted. Hair is next sewed on,
and the back othe mask stuffed with rags and cov
ered to form the back of the head. 1% good many 4
of the early puppets of the Pixie Marionettes were
made in this manner, which was indeed very satis
factory. Be sure to shellac all faces again after the
paint on the face is dry. This extra coat of shellac
adds to the life of the countenance.

                         The Body

    After completing the head, the body is next to be
considered. Consulting the drawing, the shoulder
piece is of wood, ctit as shown and is one and one-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1

half inches high and three inches across. The wood \
used for both the shoulder and hip pieces should be

                                                     4

                             -5-

at least an inch in thickness. The hip is to cut as
shown and should measure one and one-half by
two and one-half inches. A piece of thick wire must

be inserted as shown ( T ) at the base of the hip. T h e

shoulder and hip pieces are to be joined together by
a section of cloth which will allow an inch and a
quarter between the hips and shoulder of the mari
onette. This cloth section allows the puppet much
flexibility in walking and sitting.

    Looking at drawing I, T' is the wire hanger for

the legs, E screw eyes for string and L the leather

joints.

                        Legs and Feet

    The legs are to be cut of rounded soft wood and
joined as shown. T h e joint should be made of
leather to allow for a bend. ( L ) A section of the
leg is removed from the back on both pieces so that
the bend in the leg may be made. Small slots form
the place for the leather joint to be tacked into. T h e
top section of the leg is to be two and one-fourth
inches long and the lower section, two and one-
fourth. After joining the two wood sections togeth
er, they must be attached to the hip wire by a piece
of cloth. Attach the cloth to the leg over the hip

wire to allow it to swing freely. (See drawing I.)
-6-


                                                          i;

                                                              I

Drawing I                                                     ,

                                                              k
                               -8-

    Another piece of leather, placed in the same
manner as the knee joint must be inserted into the
bottom of the leg to serve as a joint at the ankle
between the foot and the leg. Feet* can be either
modeled from plastic wood or carved from wood.

    A suitable place must be allowed at the top of
the E Q O ~ for inserting the leather ankle joint. An-
other small screw eye ( E ) must be placed on each
knee, above the joint, and also one at the middle sf
the back of the hip piece or controlling strings to
be attached later,

                      A m s and Hands

    The hands can either be modeled from plastic
wood or h i l t up of a wire frame with fingers, and
covered with tape, A small hole must be placed at
the wrist in either case for the hand controlling
strings. The arms are simply pieces of cloth tubing
attached to the shoulder and hand. Do not allow
the arms, including the hands, to hang Power than
4s inches. Attach the head by means of a wire run
through another screw-eye at the top of the shoulder
piece.

     *Note: Feet should be weighted with lead shot.
This will help greatly in walking.
                              -9-                                  I


I     /  VJhen all is complete, carefully look over the

         puppet to be sure that everything is as it should be,

         and that a screw eye is placed at either knee, the

         u;iicldle of the back of the hip piece, and on the head,

         as previously discussed, and the marionette is ready

         for dressing. It is always a good idea to make a

         working drawing of each marionette before making

         i t , to get proper proportions, etc.

   ,                          sessing

             The puppet should be dressed of light material
         such as silk or sateen, and should be dressed as
        loosely as possible to allow the utmost flexibility. I n
   t a puppet as small as this, a great deal must be relied
         upon costuming and the painting of the head, to
         bring out character.

         The Controller (See drawiiag 11)

              Now lor the controller, as it is commonly called,

   3

         or device for attaching the strings that will bi.ing

   I the marionette to life.                                       fl

   !     As is shown in the drawing (In), the controller is 1

         made from strips of wood to form a cross. The

         main piece ( a ) is to be 9 inches long. At one end

        are two slits for the hand strinas. and at the other.

   1 j one slit for the back string, Piece ( b ) is seven
          -10-

inches long, and after being slit once at each end, is

attached by nails to piece ( a ) 23 inches from the

end. Next place a small peg half way between

piece ( b ) and the end of (a). Another strip of .4

wood ( c ) must be prepared in the same manner as

piece ( b ) , and a hole bored through its center, to        P


fit the peg. Piece ( c ) is called the leg control, and   t

to either end of it are fastened the two knee strings.

Attaching the Strings (See drawing 11)

First in order oi attachment are the head strings

(see drawing). They are fastened to either end of

piece ( b ) by slipping the string through the pre-

pared slot and winding each around several times.

Next attach the back string to the extreme end of

piece ( a ) and the hand strings to the opposite end
(see drawing 11). As previously stated, the leg

strings are fastened to the ends of piece ( c ), the lat

ter being placed over the peg. This peg arrange

ment is to allow the puppeteer to set the foot control

(c) down when operating the hand and other

strings.

A thin leather strap may be nailed to either end             d

of strip ( b ) to hang the puppet up with when not

in use. Strings may be of either strong linen carpet         t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I

thread, or, better still, small black silk fish line.

                                                          4
   -1 1-

   String the puppet about 30 inches high, this will be

I  aboat the right height for the average individual.

   Operating the Marionette

`*f

            Next we must teach the marionetie to walk, move

   move his hands, head, and other parts of the body.

   Holding the main control in your left hand, remove

   the foot control Erom its peg with your right hand.

   By carefully tipping the foot control up and down,

   first one end, then the other, the puppet's legs will

   move in the manner of walking. Walking is one ol:

   the most difficult feats for a marionette to perform,

   so the beginner will no doubt have some trouble

   with this important movement. After a little prac

f  tice, though, walking will become easy, and before

   you know it, your little fellow will be parading

   proudly up and down the room. By pulling on the

   hand strings either one or both, the puppet will raise

   and lower his hands. By tipping the whole control-

t  ler sideways, the puppet will move his head from

   side to side. If you tip the whole controller down,

   the puppet will bow. Many other amusing feats

   may be discovered by the ingenuity of the operator.

   and must be left to his ability. Don't be discour

   aged a t first if you seem to be helpless with the con-

   troller. Remember directions, and you will have no
                 -12-

      will soon seem natural.

                 Ideas for a Stage

      A simple marionette stage may be made by cut- 1

' 1
  ting one side and the top irom a large wooden box.
      The puppeteer stands behind the enclosed back and

      works the puppet over inside the box. Curtains may

      be set up in such a manner as to hide the puppeteer,

      and only the marionette will be seen. There are

      many other points of interest that could be stated

      about marionettes, aird their making, but limited

      space does not allow it. However, by a little

1     thought, many clever, and original ideas can be pat

      into use by the ability of the interested marionette

      producer!

                      Some Scenery Suggestions

          Scenery plays an important part in the success
      ful marionette production. There are several ways
      of making scenery, and there is some dispute as to
      which is the best. The scenery used for the Pixie
      Marionette's productions is made of oilcloth, the
      back of which is used, painted with alabastine a r t
      colors. This serves as a very satisfactory back
      drop, as any number of colors may be obtained, and
      blended. For the beginner, I would suggest that he
                    -1 3-

       procure a large piece of cardboard, and either cray
       on the scene on, or do it in art water colors. Co7-
       ored paper may also be cut out and pasted on, This
t latter is more of a task, but very effective.

      In nearly all productions, properties are needed.

   t  Small tables and chairs may be purchased from the

   ,  10 cent store, and will serve nicely, or furniture may

      be made of cardboard or wood. For the outside of

      a house, a piece of heavy cardboard, or beaver

      Soarb may be used, and painted to suit the play.

          No stage is really complete without at least min
      or lighting facilities. Christmas tree lights may be
      utilized for footlights, while a large sized socket
      with reflector may serve as a border light. Border
      lights are inside, and just above the top of the front
      procenium, or opening of the stage. Colored gela
      tines may be used to give different effects, such as
      green for night, red for sunrise, or amber for day-
      light. An unlimited amount of opportunity may be
      found in just the lighting alone and the puppeteer
      will find many an hour spent producing novel light

      ing effects.

                    Presentations

      By making enough characters, a complete play

4     may be presented. It is usually best to produce some
           -1 4-

simple play, perhaps of the fairy tale nature. This

type of play requires little staging and few charac

ters, making it easier for the amateur, and in addi     '

tion, is more interesting to children. Several plays

suitable for puppet presentation are:

"Jack and the Beanstalk"                                3

"Hansel and Gretel"

"Little Red Riding Hood"

"The Three Bears"                      *

    Consult the public library for other plays, but be
sure to choose one that will be of interest to your

audience.

    You may even write marionette plays yourself,
or revise a play from a story that takes your fancy.
In each instance, remember to present the characters

in such a way as not to have too many working pup-
pets at once on the stage. Such a scene would be
difficult to present, as with a small stage, the less
people you have behind the scenes, the easier. Take
plenty of time when presenting the production. All

lines must be memorized. The use of script behind
scenes would detract from the puppeteer's attention
on the puppet, and the marionette would be likely
to sag, or be lifted into the air when he is not watch

ed closely. Do not rush your lines, and remember

to speak very distinctly, as it is often difficult for 6
      -1 5-
                                                        ,


   1 the audience to understand what you say whzn be-
          hind a curtain if you do not speak "down and w t . "

   +  Puppet Animals

              Marionette productions are not complete with
   ' out some form of puppet animal. T h e audience cle

          lights in watching their actions, and often, if the an-
   1 imals are the correct proportion, they will add much

          xealism to the show.

               Marionette animals may be made of cloth, or
          wood; or they may be made from regular animals

         purchased from the toy store. If you should pre

          fer the latter, which is indeed much easier, careELil3y
          disjoint the legs and head (not to forget the tail) aild
          reattach them so that they will move more easily.
          The making of the controller for these animals must
          be left to the puppeteer, as controllers differ greatly
          according to the type of animal used. However, if
          you moderate the controller used for marionette peo
          ple, it will do quite nicely. Experience will show
          you the way in further puppet making, and you
          must use your own ideas.

      A Few Ideas For a Vaudeville Show

      Instead oE presenting merely plays, a great deal

c     of variety may be had by giving a small vaudevill;
                       -16-


show, Although H would not advise this right at the

beginning of your marionette career, it may be
worked out to advantage by anyone that has ideas.

A clown may perform with a dog; a tiny puppet

dancer may flit gracefully before the audience; a

marionette orchestra may present well known musi-    $

cal numbers with the help of an offstage phono

graph. A juggler, a skeleton, and even a marionette

circus may be worked out. ideas will seem to spring

up from nowhere once you have set your interest in

the marionette hobby.
               Glancing through a magazine one day, the aiz
           thor discovered a short article telling how iiiari
          onettes were made. The idea seemed to beckon
   ; him into a world of tiny figures all dancing merrily
   I, to the tune of little flutes. The idea was carried out
          to the best of his ability, and before the year was
          over, "Jack and the Beanstalk," the first production,
   I was presented in the basement of the writer's home.
          Interest swelled, new marionettes and productions
          took form, and many mprovements took place. Be-
          fore long, friends were asking for performances at

          their parties, schools wishes to have exhibitions for
          their pupils, and numerous other engagemcnts came

          up. With a small portable stage, fully equipped
           with lighting system and scenery, the Pixie hlarion

   I ettes presented their first outside performance.

           Needless to say, it was a success and many other
          engagements resulted from the first.

       It is not, as yet, the writer's purpose to carry the
   marionette producing business out to ari extremely
   profitable means, as it is still merely a hobby, but
   all indications point to a way of satisfaction in life
   with puppetry.

   The first engagement of the pixie Marionettes

   was in 1928. Since that time they have had engage

I  ments at many theaters, clubs, churches, schodls and

   department stores. During the Christmas season

   several weeks' engagements are held at department

   stores for the benefit of the childrei.

8  At present there are nearly 75 marionettes corn-
-1 8-

posiiig the troupe. The present repertoire consists
01 tairy tales, mysteries, and many vaudeville acts.

How the Pixie Marionettes are Made

    `Fhe puppets or' the Pixie Marionettes are made
entirely oi the wood putty mentioned in the instruc

tions of this book, although instead of modeling the
patty itselr, the desired arucie is modeled in stand 1c
ard moueling clay, and then a plaster of paris cast
is made over the model. After the mold is hard, it
is thoroughly soaked in water, and lined with the
plastic wooci. t-Pkter dry, the wood is removed from
rlie mold, trimriiea and painted, and prepared for
atta~:uingto the uody or other part of the puppet.
 he entire puppet is made from this plastic wood,
eacn part being cast first. There are many advan
tages in using this type of material, since it is easily ,
worked and stays firmly in any shape originally
placed. `l'he standard size marionette used by the
rixie Marionettes at present is 24 inches.

There is a certain distinction of marionette work

arid that is, that puppet making is one enterprise

that seems unlimited. Its branches lead out into art,

drama, music, play writing, and numerous other arts

and crafts. One thing is sure: It is very seldom that

one working with marionettes has been known to

yet tired of his work. One is led on and on by the

fantastical, amusing antics of "little Mary!"          r

    How Some Marionette Tricks Are Performed

    Many have come to us after a performance and
asked numerous questions such as, "How does the

                                                                                                                                                         t
                 T h e Author and Two Puppets from
                                  "Three Wishes"

(
- -,,, I...  .I-  - ^ .

                                                     ,

Scene from " T h e Gold Bug,t , one of the presenta

                tions of the Pixie Marionettes
                          -19-


         juggler catch those balls so cleverly?" and "How
   I does the skelleton fall apart, and then come back

      together again?"

           Since everyone in general seems to be interested
      in how these tricks are done, I shall now attempt
I to explain a few matters regarding them.

   t  The balls the juggler uses have a small hole thru

      the center of each. A string running from the con-

      troller continues down through the ball, and is fas

      tened to the palm of the hand. By pulling on the
      hand string, the balls shoot up into the air in a most

      satisfying manner.

      All of the skeleton's limbs are held on by strings

      attached to the end of the limb and run up through
      a hole at the shoulder or hip to the controller. When
      the strings are dropped, the limbs fall off. When

       the strings are drawn up, the limbs return to their

I original places.

          To make the sausages appear on Mary's nose in
      the "Three Wishes," a string is run from the sau

      sages, which are concealed in Mary's pocket,

      through her nose, and to the controller. When the

      time comes, a gentle pull of the string is all that is
i necessary to 1` sausage" Mary's nose!

      Any questions will be gladly answered by writ

( ing to John Faustman,

I     THE PIXIE MARIONETTES

I                       Ripon, Wisconsin

II
