1. J Sports Sci Med. 2014 Sep 1;13(3):502-10. eCollection 2014 Sep.

Muscle Activation during Push-Ups with Different Suspension Training Systems.

Calatayud J(1), Borreani S(1), Colado JC(1), Martín FF(1), Rogers ME(2), Behm 
DG(3), Andersen LL(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Group in Sport and Health, Laboratory of Physical Activity and 
Health, Department of Physical Education and Sports, University of Valencia , 
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Department of Human Performance Studies, Wichita State University , Wichita, 
Kansas, USA.
(3)School of Human Kinetics and Recreation, Memorial University of Newfoundland 
, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada.
(4)National Research Centre for the Working Environment , Copenhagen, Denmark.

The purpose of this study was to analyze upper extremity and core muscle 
activation when performing push-ups with different suspension devices. Young fit 
male university students (n = 29) performed 3 push-ups each with 4 different 
suspension systems. Push-up speed was controlled using a metronome and testing 
order was randomized. Average amplitude of the electromyographic root mean 
square of Triceps Brachii, Upper Trapezius, Anterior Deltoid, Clavicular 
Pectoralis, Rectus Abdominis, Rectus Femoris, and Lumbar Erector Spinae was 
recorded. Electromyographic signals were normalized to the maximum voluntary 
isometric contraction (MVIC). Electromyographic data were analyzed with 
repeated-measures analysis of variance with a Bonferroni post hoc. Based upon 
global arithmetic mean of all muscles analyzed, the suspended push-up with a 
pulley system provided the greatest activity (37.76% of MVIC; p < 0.001). 
Individually, the suspended push-up with a pulley system also provided the 
greatest triceps brachii, upper trapezius, rectus femoris and erector lumbar 
spinae muscle activation. In contrast, more stable conditions seem more 
appropriate for pectoralis major and anterior deltoid muscles. Independent of 
the type of design, all suspension systems were especially effective training 
tools for reaching high levels of rectus abdominis activation. Key 
PointsCompared with standard push-ups on the floor, suspended push-ups increase 
core muscle activation.A one-anchor system with a pulley is the best option to 
increase TRICEP, TRAPS, LUMB and FEM muscle activity.More stable conditions such 
as the standard push-up or a parallel band system provide greater increases in 
DELT and PEC muscle activation.A suspended push-up is an effective method to 
achieve high muscle activity levels in the ABS.

PMCID: PMC4126284
PMID: 25177174