1. Phys Sportsmed. 2014 Nov;42(4):106-19. doi: 10.3810/psm.2014.11.2097.

Muscle activity levels in upper-body push exercises with different loads and 
stability conditions.

Calatayud J(1), Borreani S, Colado JC, Martin F, Rogers ME.

Author information:
(1)Research Group in Sport and Health, Laboratory of Physical Activity and 
Health, Department of Physical Education and Sports, University of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Exercises that aim to stimulate muscular hypertrophy and increase 
neural drive to the muscle fibers should be used during rehabilitation. Thus, it 
is of interest to identify optimal exercises that efficiently achieve high 
muscle activation levels.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to compare the muscle activation levels 
during push-up variations (ie, suspended push-ups with/without visual input on 
different suspension systems, and push-ups on the floor with/without additional 
elastic resistance) with the bench press exercise and the standing cable press 
exercise both performed at 50%, 70%, and 85% of the 1-repetition maximum.
METHODS: Young fit male university students (N = 29) performed 3 repetitions in 
all conditions under the same standardized procedures. Average amplitude of the 
electromyogram (EMG) root mean square for the rectus abdominis, external 
oblique, sternocostal head of the pectoralis major, anterior deltoid, long head 
of the triceps brachii, upper trapezius, anterior serratus, and posterior 
deltoid was recorded. The EMG signals were normalized to the maximum voluntary 
isometric contraction. The EMG data were analyzed with repeated-measures 
analysis of variance with a Bonferroni post hoc.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Elastic-resisted push-ups induce similar EMG stimulus 
in the prime movers as the bench press at high loads while also providing a 
greater core challenge. Suspended push-ups are a highly effective way to 
stimulate abdominal muscles. Pectoralis major, anterior deltoid, and anterior 
serratus are highly elicited during more stable pushing conditions, whereas 
abdominal muscles, triceps brachii, posterior deltoid, and upper trapezius are 
affected in the opposite manner.

DOI: 10.3810/psm.2014.11.2097
PMID: 25419894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]