1. J Phys Ther Sci. 2016 Jul;28(7):2114-8. doi: 10.1589/jpts.28.2114. Epub 2016
Jul  29.

EMG activity of the serratus anterior and trapezius muscles during the different 
phases of the push-up plus exercise on different support surfaces and different 
hand positions.

Gioftsos G(1), Arvanitidis M(1), Tsimouris D(1), Kanellopoulos A(1), Paras G(1), 
Trigkas P(1), Sakellari V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, School of Health and Caring Professions, 
Technological Educational Institute (TEI) of Sterea Ellada, Greece.

[Purpose] The appropriate exercise prescription is crucial for achieving 
scapular stability and providing successful rehabilitation, and the Push-up Plus 
(PuP) exercise has an important role in shoulder rehabilitation. Consequently, 
this study examined the effect of support surface stability, hand positioning, 
and phase of exercise, on the trapezius and serratus anterior muscle 
contractions as well as on the EMG ratio of the upper/lower trapezius. [Subjects 
and Methods] Thirteen healthy male volunteers participated in this study. The 
subjects performed the PuP exercise on stable and unstable supporting surfaces 
with three different hand orientations. During the PuP exercise, the muscle 
activities of the upper (UT) and lower (LT) trapezius, as well as the serratus 
anterior (SA) were measured and expressed as percentages of maximum voluntary 
isometric contraction (%MVIC). [Results] The EMG activities of UT and LT were 
statistically greater during the push-up phase compared to the plus phase of the 
exercise. The contrary was recorded for the activity of the SA. SA was affected 
by the support surface as well as by the hand positioning. [Conclusion] The 
results suggest that different phases of the PuP exercise require different 
muscle stability actions with corresponding activations of appropriate muscle 
fibers. A detailed prescription of the required phase of the exercise can more 
effectively activate the scapula-thoracic musculature.

DOI: 10.1589/jpts.28.2114
PMCID: PMC4968519
PMID: 27512278