1. J Sport Rehabil. 2019 Dec 19;29(7):1001-1018. doi: 10.1123/jsr.2018-0449.
Print  2020 Sep 1.

Muscle Activity Ratios of Scapular Stabilizers During Closed Kinetic Chain 
Exercises in Healthy Shoulders: A Systematic Review.

Karabay D, Emük Y, Özer Kaya D.

CONTEXT: Selective strengthening of scapular stabilizers is one of the emphases 
of the recent literature. Closed kinetic chain (CKC) exercises are used 
extensively in shoulder rehabilitation. However, a limited number of studies 
have reported scapular muscle ratios during CKC exercises.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the CKC exercises producing the optimal ratios of the 
scapular stabilizer muscles in healthy shoulders.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A systematic search within PubMed, Embase, CINAHL Plus, 
and SPORTDiscus with Full Text and ULAKBIM National Medical Database was 
performed up to January 2018. Studies were selected according to the 
predetermined criteria. If the pooled mean ratios (upper trapezius [UT]/middle 
trapezius [MT], UT/lower trapezius [LT], and UT/serratus anterior [SA]), which 
were calculated from the percentage of maximum voluntary contractions of 
muscles, were <0.60, these exercises were considered as ideal for higher 
activation of the MT, LT, and SA than the UT.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The search identified 1284 studies, and 29 observational 
studies were included for review. Seventy-nine CKC exercises were determined. 
Four exercises for the MT, 9 for the LT, and 59 for the SA were identified from 
the articles as being optimal exercises to activate the specified muscle more 
than the UT.
CONCLUSIONS: This review identified optimal CKC exercises that provide good 
ratios between the MT, LT, and SA with the UT. Most exercises have optimal UT/SA 
ratios, but some exercises performed on unstable surfaces may lead to excessive 
activation of the UT relative to the SA. For the UT/MT, the isometric low row, 
inferior glide, and half supine pull-up with slings are the ideal exercises. 
Isometric one-hand knee push-up variations seem to be the best choice for the 
UT/LT. The results suggest that many CKC exercises may be utilized to enhance 
scapular muscle balance when rehabilitating shoulder pathology.

DOI: 10.1123/jsr.2018-0449
PMID: 31860828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]