1. Dyn Med. 2006 Jun 9;5:7. doi: 10.1186/1476-5918-5-7.

Shoulder muscle EMG activity during push up variations on and off a Swiss ball.

Lehman GJ(1), MacMillan B, MacIntyre I, Chivers M, Fluter M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Graduate Studies, Canadian Memorial Chiropractic College, 
Toronto, ON, Canada. glehman@cmcc.ca

BACKGROUND: Surface instability is a common addition to traditional 
rehabilitation and strength exercises with the aim of increasing muscle 
activity, increasing exercise difficulty and improving joint proprioception. The 
aim of the current study was to determine if performing upper body closed 
kinetic chain exercises on a labile surface (Swiss ball) influences myoelectric 
amplitude when compared with a stable surface.
METHODS: Thirteen males were recruited from a convenience sample of college 
students. Surface electromyograms were recorded from the triceps, pectoralis 
major, latissimus dorsi, rectus abdominis and external oblique while performing 
push up exercises with the feet or hands placed on a bench and separately on a 
Swiss ball. A push up plus exercise was also evaluated with hands on the support 
surface.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Not all muscles responded with an increase in muscle 
activity. The pectoralis major muscle was not influenced by surface stability. 
The triceps and rectus abdominis muscles showed increases in muscle activity 
only when the hands were on the unstable surface. The external oblique muscle 
was only influenced by surface stability during the performance of the push up 
plus exercise. No muscle showed a change in activation level when the legs were 
supported by the Swiss ball instead of the bench.
CONCLUSION: Muscle activity can be influenced by the addition of surface 
instability however an increase in muscle activity does not influence all 
muscles in all conditions. The relationship between the participant's center of 
mass, the location of the unstable surface and the body part contacting the 
Swiss ball may be important factors in determining the muscle activation changes 
following changes in surface stability.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-5918-5-7
PMCID: PMC1508143
PMID: 16762080