1. J Athl Train. 2015 Nov;50(11):1126-32. doi: 10.4085/1062-6050-50.9.09. Epub
2015  Oct 21.

Selective Activation of Shoulder, Trunk, and Arm Muscles: A Comparative Analysis 
of Different Push-Up Variants.

Marcolin G(1), Petrone N(1)(2), Moro T(1), Battaglia G(1)(3), Bianco A(1)(3), 
Paoli A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and.
(2)Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Padova, Italy;
(3)Sport and Exercise Sciences Research Unit, University of Palermo, Italy.

CONTEXT: The push-up is a widely used exercise for upper limb strengthening that 
can be performed with many variants. A comprehensive analysis of muscle 
activation during the ascendant phase (AP) and descendant phase (DP) in 
different variants could be useful for trainers and rehabilitators.
OBJECTIVE: To obtain information on the effect of different push-up variants on 
the electromyography (EMG) of a large sample of upper limb muscles and to 
investigate the role of the trunk and abdomen muscles during the AP and DP.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: University laboratory.
PATIENTS OR OTHER PARTICIPANTS: Eight healthy, young volunteers without a 
history of upper extremity or spine injury.
INTERVENTION(S): Participants performed a set of 10 repetitions for each push-up 
variant: standard, wide, narrow, forward (FP), and backward (BP). Surface EMG of 
12 selected muscles and kinematics data were synchronously recorded to describe 
the AP and DP.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Mean EMG activity of the following muscles was 
analyzed: serratus anterior, deltoideus anterior, erector spinae, latissimus 
dorsi, rectus abdominis, triceps brachii caput longus, triceps brachii caput 
lateralis, obliquus externus abdominis, pectoralis major sternal head, 
pectoralis major clavicular head, trapezius transversalis, and biceps brachii.
RESULTS: The triceps brachii and pectoralis major exhibited greater activation 
during the narrow-base variant. The highest activation of abdomen and back 
muscles was recorded for the FP and BP variants. The DP demonstrated the least 
electrical activity across all muscles, with less marked differences for the 
abdominal and erector spinae muscles because of their role as stabilizers.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on these findings, we suggest the narrow-base variant to 
emphasize triceps and pectoralis activity and the BP variant for total upper 
body strength conditioning. The FP and BP variants should be implemented 
carefully in participants with low back pain because of the greater activation 
of abdominal and back muscles.

DOI: 10.4085/1062-6050-50.9.09
PMCID: PMC4732391
PMID: 26488636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]