1. J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil. 2021;34(1):3-16. doi: 10.3233/BMR-191771.

Optimal activation ratio of the scapular muscles in closed kinetic chain 
shoulder exercises: A systematic review.

Mendez-Rebolledo G(1)(2), Morales-Verdugo J(3), Orozco-Chavez I(4), Habechian 
FAP(5), Padilla EL(6), de la Rosa FJB(2).

Author information:
(1)Escuela de Kinesiología, Facultad de Salud, Universidad Santo Tomás, Chile.
(2)Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Seville, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Ciencias Preclínicas, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad 
Católica del Maule, Talca, Chile.
(4)Departamento de Ciencias del Movimiento Humano, Facultad de Ciencias de la 
Salud, Universidad de Talca, Talca, Chile.
(5)Laboratorio de Investigación Clínica en Kinesiología, Departamento de 
Kinesiología, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Católica del Maule, 
Talca, Chile.
(6)Postgrado en Ciencias del Ejercicio y del Deporte, Universidad Estatal del 
Valle de Ecatepec, México.

BACKGROUND: Muscle synergies contribute to scapular position during arm 
movement. The trapezius and serratus anterior (SA) muscles are the main 
stabilizers and are therefore the main target muscles of therapeutic exercises.
OBJECTIVE: To systematically review the current literature investigating the 
optimal activation ratio of the scapular muscles during a range of closed 
kinetic chain exercises.
METHODS: A systematic review search was conducted to identify studies reporting 
shoulder electromyography (EMG) activity during rehabilitation exercises in 
healthy participants. The search was conducted in PubMed, Cochrane Library, 
MEDLINE, CINAHL, Scopus, SPORTDiscus, and ScienceDirect. The included studies 
reported closed kinetic chain exercises and the muscle activity as a percentage 
of maximum voluntary isometric contraction (%MVIC) or muscle ratios of the lower 
trapezius (LT), middle trapezius (MT), and SA with respect to the upper 
trapezius (UT). Muscle ratios were classified as optimal if they were equal to 
or lower than 0.6, and the adapted Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) was used to 
evaluate the methodological quality of the selected studies.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine studies were included in this review; 7 main exercises and 
30 variations of these were reported. The average electromyographic activity of 
the concentric and eccentric phase was considered. Half Push Up, Push Up Plus, 
and Scap Protraction exercises showed optimal SA activity (UT/SA < 0.6), while 
Press Up, Half Push Up, and One Hand Plank exercises showed optimal LT activity 
(UT/LT < 0.6). According to the NOS, 15 studies were classified as moderate 
methodological quality.
CONCLUSIONS: The exercises in higher positions (e.g. exercises with the trunk 
closest to the vertical line) or unstable surfaces tend to favor UT activity 
over the MT, LT and SA. The exercises including scapular retraction showed 
optimal UT/MT and UT/LT ratios, while those including scapular protraction 
showed optimal UT/SA ratios. This will assist therapists in the correct 
selection of exercises for shoulder rehabilitation.

DOI: 10.3233/BMR-191771
PMID: 32831190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]