1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2015 Feb 10;16(1):23. doi:
10.1186/s12891-015-0486-5.

The effects of exercise type and elbow angle on vertical ground reaction force 
and muscle activity during a push-up plus exercise.

San Juan JG(1), Suprak DN(2), Roach SM(3), Lyda M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Education, Health and Recreation, Western Washington 
University, Bellingham, WA, USA. jun.sanjuan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Physical Education, Health and Recreation, Western Washington 
University, Bellingham, WA, USA. dave.suprak@wwu.edu.
(3)Western Institute of Neuromechanics, Eugene, OR, USA. tensegrity1@msn.com.
(4)Western Institute of Neuromechanics, Eugene, OR, USA. mhlyda@msn.com.

BACKGROUND: Proper alignment of the scapula during upper extremity motion is 
important in maintaining shoulder joint function and health. Push-up plus 
exercise is considered as one of the best exercise to strengthen the muscles 
that stabilize the scapula. The purpose of the study is to examine the effects 
of push-up plus variants and elbow position on vertical ground reaction force 
and electromyographical activity of four shoulder muscles during concentric 
contraction.
METHODS: A total of 22 healthy subjects volunteered for the study. Each of the 
subjects performed both modified and traditional push-up plus. Modified push-up 
plus was performed with both knees and hands touching the ground while the 
traditional push-up plus was executed with hands and feet contacting the ground. 
Electromyography (EMG) of the upper trapezius (UT), lower trapezius (LT), 
infraspinatus (INFRA), and serratus anterior (SA), and vertical ground reaction 
forces (vGRF) were collected.
RESULTS: The traditional push-up plus exhibited higher EMG activity in all 
muscles tested (P < .05) and vertical ground reaction force (P < .001) compared 
to modified push-up plus. The highest difference in EMG activity between the two 
exercises was observed with the Serratus Anterior muscle (22%). Additionally, 
the traditional push-up plus presented a higher vGRF compared to the modified 
push-up plus (P < .001) by 17%. The SA had the greatest EMG activity compared to 
the other muscles tested during the concentric phase of the traditional push-up 
plus, and this did not occur during the plus phase of the exercise.
CONCLUSION: The highest activity of the serratus anterior occurred at 55° of 
elbow extension during the concentric phase of the traditional PUP and not at 
the plus phase of the exercise. This suggests that when prescribing an exercise 
to target the serratus anterior, a traditional push-up is adequate and the 
plus-phase is not necessary. However, for patients that cannot perform a 
traditional push-up, the modified push-up plus would be a great alternative to 
strengthen their serratus anterior.

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-015-0486-5
PMCID: PMC4327800
PMID: 25881172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]