results suggest that the instability of the RMU primarily increases the required recruitment of the upper limbs but does not significantly change the recruitment of the shoulder stabilizers. Appropriate upper limb development is needed to perform the RMU and the BMU may be a better technique to learn first due to its lower difficulty. Keywords: Gymnastics, muscle activation, shoulder, suspension status released display-pdf yes is-in-collection-domain yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Collection date 2023. INTRODUCTION In recent years, body weight exercises have become increasingly popular with the general population ( 7 ). The ability to perform these exercises with little to no equipment coupled with the exercise stimulus of body weight exercises has led to this increase in use ( 6 , 12 , 16 ). Traditional bodyweight exercises include the pull up, dip, and push-up. The muscle up would also fall into this body weight category and could be considered a combination of the pull up and dip exercises ( 10 ). The muscle up is a variation of a common gymnastic movement. It can be performed on either a straight bar (bar muscle up) or on rings (ring muscle up). The ring muscle up is a variation of the front up rise while the bar muscle up is a variation of the glide kip. These movements all take place in the sagittal plane and involve large upper body muscles to perform the movement ( 10 ). Much like an Olympic lift, the muscle up is a complex movement that requires both a pulling and a pushing phase. Additionally, movement is often initiated with a leg swing and drive called a kip. This motion allows the athlete to utilize momentum to help complete the movement. It is used to train the muscles of the upper shoulder girdle and arms. The pull phase of the muscle up starts from a hanging position, either from a bar or rings. The body is pulled towards the bar or rings resulting in adduction and extension of the shoulder joint and flexion of the elbow joint. As the body moves towards the bar or rings, the wrist rotates, and the athlete enters the dip phase of the movement. The dip phase starts with the athlete in shoulder extension and elbow flexion. The athlete then presses upward extending the elbow. The muscle up trains the latissimus dorsi and biceps brachii primary during the pull phase. During the dip phase, the triceps brachii and pectoralis major are primarily trained. The upper trapezius, lower trapezius, and the serratus anterior are the primary stabilizers for the scapula throughout the movement. While there is much anecdotal discussion about the differences in bar muscle ups and ring muscle ups, no known studies have been performed to assess the differences. It is speculated that the ring muscle up will create a higher training stimulus because of the instability of the rings. Muscle recruitment has been shown to change when exercises are performed in unstable environments, compared to those same exercises being performed in a stable environment ( 4 , 6 , 9 , 11 , 13 , 16 ). Specifically, De Mey et al. ( 7 ) found that, in unstable environments, muscles acting on the scapula had decreased muscle activation while muscles acting on the glenohumeral joint had increased muscle activation. This has been observed when agonist and antagonist muscles take on the role of stabilization when the body is placed in an unstable position ( 4 , 6 ). For example, it has been reported that training in unstable environments increases core muscle activation and leads to an increase in functional performance measures ( 4 , 6 , 9 , 16 ). However, studies evaluating pulling activities in both stable and unstable conditions do not suggest there would be differences in muscle activity ( 8 , 15 ). Snarr et al. ( 15 ) reported no significant difference in muscle activation of the latissimus dorsi, biceps brachii, and posterior deltoid when performing towel and a suspension pull up compared to a traditional pull up. They did report significantly lower middle trapezius activity during the towel pull up compared to a traditional pull up ( 15 ). Similarly, Dickie et al. ( 8 ) reported no difference in muscle activation of eight upper extremity muscles during a neutral grip rope pull up compared to other variations with stable hand grips. Applying the results of these studies to the muscle up is difficult. The towel and rope pull ups do not require as much movement of the upper limbs as a musc