1. J Hum Kinet. 2015 Dec 30;49:141-7. doi: 10.1515/hukin-2015-0116. eCollection 
2015 Dec 22.

The Use of Thermal Imaging in the Evaluation of the Symmetry of Muscle Activity 
in Various Types of Exercises (Symmetrical and Asymmetrical).

Chudecka M(1), Lubkowska A(2), Leźnicka K(1), Krupecki K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Functional Anatomy and Biometry, Faculty of Physical 
Culture and Health Promotion, Szczecin University, Szczecin, Poland.
(2)Department of Functional Diagnostics and Physical Medicine, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland.
(3)Department of Theory and Practice of Sport, Faculty of Physical Culture and 
Health Promotion, Szczecin University, Szczecin, Poland.

In order to achieve higher efficiency of training and thus better athletic 
performance, new research and diagnostic methods are constantly being developed, 
particularly those that are non-invasive. One such a method is thermography, 
suitable for quantitative and therefore objective evaluation of variables, such 
as changes in the temperature of the skin covering working muscles. The aim of 
this study was to use a thermal imaging infrared camera to evaluate temperature 
changes of symmetric body surfaces over symmetrically working muscles of male 
scullers after exercising on a two-oared rowing ergometer and compare these to 
asymmetrically working muscles of handball players after an endurance training 
session containing elements of an actual game. In the scullers, the mean 
temperature of body surfaces was always lower post than pre exercise, with no 
significant differences in an average temperature drop between the opposite 
sides, indicating that the work of the muscles involved in the physical exertion 
on the rowing ergometer was symmetrical. In contrast, in the handball players, 
skin temperatures in symmetric areas over the asymmetrically working muscles 
showed statistically significant differences between sides, which was associated 
with the functional asymmetry of training. This study indicates that thermal 
imaging may be useful for coaches in the evaluation of technical preparations in 
sports in which equal involvement of symmetric muscles is a condition of 
success, e.g. in scullers.

DOI: 10.1515/hukin-2015-0116
PMCID: PMC4723162
PMID: 26839614