1. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011 Feb;43(2):303-11. doi:
10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181edfa96.

Effects of strength training on muscle fatigue mapping from surface EMG and 
blood metabolites.

Izquierdo M(1), González-Izal M, Navarro-Amezqueta I, Calbet JA, Ibañez J, 
Malanda A, Mallor F, Häkkinen K, Kraemer WJ, Gorostiaga EM.

Author information:
(1)Studies, Research and Sport Medicine Center, Government of Navarra, Pamplona, 
Navarra, SPAIN. izquierdo@gmail.com

PURPOSE: this study examined the effects of heavy resistance training on the 
relationships between power loss and surface EMG (sEMG) indices and blood 
metabolite concentrations on dynamic exercise-induced fatigue with the same 
relative load as in pretraining.
METHODS: twelve trained subjects performed five sets consisting of 10 
repetitions in the leg press, with 2 min of rest between sets before and after a 
strength training period. sEMG variables (the mean average voltage, the median 
spectral frequency, and the Dimitrov spectral index of muscle fatigue) from 
vastus medialis and lateralis muscles and metabolic responses (i.e., blood 
lactate, uric acid, and ammonia concentrations) were measured.
RESULTS: the peak power loss after the posttraining protocol was greater (61%) 
than the decline observed in the pretraining protocol (46%). Similar sEMG 
changes were found for both protocols, whereas higher metabolic demand was 
observed during the posttraining exercise. The linear models on the basis of the 
relations found between power loss and changes in sEMG variables were 
significantly different between pretraining and posttraining, whereas the linear 
models on the basis of the relations between power loss and changes in blood 
metabolite concentrations were similar.
CONCLUSIONS: linear models that use blood metabolites to map acute 
exercise-induced peak power changes were more accurate in detecting these 
changes before and after a short-term training period, whereas an attempt to 
track peak power loss using sEMG variables may fail after a strength training 
period.

DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181edfa96
PMID: 20581711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]