1. Sports Med. 2020 Dec;50(12):2209-2236. doi: 10.1007/s40279-020-01344-2.

Acute Effects of Cluster and Rest Redistribution Set Structures on Mechanical, 
Metabolic, and Perceptual Fatigue During and After Resistance Training: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Jukic I(1), Ramos AG(2)(3), Helms ER(4), McGuigan MR(4), Tufano JJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Sport Performance Research Institute New Zealand (SPRINZ), Auckland 
University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand. ivan.jukic@aut.ac.nz.
(2)Department of Physical Education and Sport, Faculty of Sport Sciences, 
University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(3)Department of Sports Sciences and Physical Conditioning, Faculty of 
Education, Universidad Católica de la Santísima Concepción, Concepción, Chile.
(4)Sport Performance Research Institute New Zealand (SPRINZ), Auckland 
University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Physical Education and 
Sport, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: The alteration of individual sets during resistance training (RT) is 
often used to allow for greater velocity and power outputs, reduce metabolite 
accumulation such as lactate and also reduce perceived exertion which can 
ultimately affect the resultant training adaptations. However, there are 
inconsistencies in the current body of evidence regarding the magnitude of the 
effects of alternative set structures (i.e., cluster sets and rest 
redistribution) on these acute mechanical, metabolic, and perceptual responses 
during and after RT.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to systematically review and meta-analyse current 
evidence on the differences between traditional and alternative (cluster and 
rest redistribution) set structures on acute mechanical, metabolic, and 
perceptual responses during and after RT, and to discuss potential reasons for 
the disparities noted in the literature.
METHODS: The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
(PRISMA) guidelines were followed, and five databases were searched until June 
2019. Studies were included when they were written in English and compared at 
least one acute mechanical, metabolic, or perceptual response between 
traditional, cluster or traditional and rest redistribution set structures in 
healthy adults. Random-effects meta-analyses and meta-regressions were performed 
where possible.
RESULTS: Thirty-two studies were included. Pooled results revealed that 
alternative set structures allowed for greater absolute mean [standardized mean 
difference (SMD) = 0.60] and peak velocity (SMD = 0.41), and mean (SMD = 0.33) 
and peak power (SMD = 0.38) during RT. In addition, alternative set structures 
were also highly effective at mitigating a decline in velocity and power 
variables during (SMD = 0.83-1.97) and after RT (SMD = 0.58) as well as reducing 
lactate accumulation (SMD = 1.61) and perceived exertion (SMD = 0.81). These 
effects of alternative set structures on velocity and power decline and 
maintenance during RT were considerably larger than for absolute velocity and 
power variables. Sub-group analyses controlling for each alternative set 
structure independently showed that cluster sets were generally more effective 
than rest redistribution in alleviating mechanical, metabolic, and perceptual 
markers of fatigue.
CONCLUSION: Alternative set structures can reduce mechanical fatigue, perceptual 
exertion, and metabolic stress during and after RT. However, fundamental 
differences in the amount of total rest time results in cluster sets generally 
being more effective than rest redistribution in alleviating fatigue-induced 
changes during RT, which highlights the importance of classifying them 
independently in research and in practice. Additionally, absolute values (i.e., 
mean session velocity or power), as well as decline and maintenance of the 
mechanical outcomes during RT, and residual mechanical fatigue after RT, are all 
affected differently by alternative set structures, suggesting that these 
variables may provide distinct information that can inform future training 
decisions.
PROTOCOL REGISTRATION: The original protocol was prospectively registered 
(CRD42019138954) with the PROSPERO (International Prospective Register of 
Systematic Reviews).

DOI: 10.1007/s40279-020-01344-2
PMID: 32901442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]