1. J Therm Biol. 2017 Oct;69:155-162. doi: 10.1016/j.jtherbio.2017.07.006. Epub 
2017 Jul 18.

Thermographic imaging in sports and exercise medicine: A Delphi study and 
consensus statement on the measurement of human skin temperature.

Moreira DG(1), Costello JT(2), Brito CJ(3), Adamczyk JG(4), Ammer K(5), Bach 
AJE(6), Costa CMA(7), Eglin C(2), Fernandes AA(8), Fernández-Cuevas I(9), 
Ferreira JJA(10), Formenti D(11), Fournet D(12), Havenith G(13), Howell K(14), 
Jung A(15), Kenny GP(16), Kolosovas-Machuca ES(17), Maley MJ(6), Merla A(18), 
Pascoe DD(19), Priego Quesada JI(20), Schwartz RG(21), Seixas ARD(22), Selfe 
J(23), Vainer BG(24), Sillero-Quintana M(25).

Author information:
(1)Federal Institute for Education, Science and Technology of Minas Gerais, 
Campus Governador Valadares, Brasil; Sports Department, Faculty of Sciences for 
Physical Activity and Sport (INEF), Technical University of Madrid, Madrid, 
Spain. Electronic address: danilo.moreira@ifmg.edu.br.
(2)Extreme Environments Laboratory, Department of Sport and Exercise Science, 
University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK.
(3)Department of Physical Education, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, 
Governador Valadares, Brazil.
(4)Józef Piłsudski University of Physical Education in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland; 
Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)European Association of Thermology, Vienna, Austria; Medical Imaging Research 
Unit, University of South Wales, Pontypridd, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences and Institute of Health and 
Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)Aeronatutics Instruction and Adaptation Center, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(8)Federal Institute for Education, Science and Technology of Minas Gerais, 
Campus Ipatinga, Brasil.
(9)School of Health and Sports Science, Cluster for Health Improvement, 
University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia; Sports Department, Faculty of 
Sciences for Physical Activity and Sport (INEF), Technical University of Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.
(10)Department of Physical Therapy, Federal University of Paraíba, João Pessoa, 
Brazil.
(11)Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Italy.
(12)Thermal Sciences Laboratory, DECATHLON SportsLab, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.
(13)Environmental Ergonomics Research Centre, Loughborough Design School, 
Loughborough University, Loughborough, United Kingdom.
(14)UCL Institute of Immunity and Transplantation, Royal Free Hospital, London, 
United Kingdom.
(15)Military Institute of Medicine, Warsaw, Poland.
(16)Human and Environmental Physiology Research Unit, School of Human Kinetics, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(17)Autonomous University of San Luis Potosí, México.
(18)Department of Neurosciences, Imaging and Clinical Sciences, University of 
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(19)Thermal Research Laboratory, Department of Kinesiology, Auburn University, 
Auburn, United States.
(20)Biophysics and Medical Physics Group, Department of Physiology, University 
of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(21)American Academy of Thermology. Piedmont Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, PA, United States.
(22)Escola Superior de Saúde, Universidade Fernando Pessoa, Porto, Portugal.
(23)Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(24)Rzhanov Institute of Semiconductor Physics SB RAS, Novosibirsk State 
University, Novosibirsk, Russia.
(25)Sports Department, Faculty of Sciences for Physical Activity and Sport 
(INEF), Technical University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

The importance of using infrared thermography (IRT) to assess skin temperature 
(tsk) is increasing in clinical settings. Recently, its use has been increasing 
in sports and exercise medicine; however, no consensus guideline exists to 
address the methods for collecting data in such situations. The aim of this 
study was to develop a checklist for the collection of tsk using IRT in sports 
and exercise medicine. We carried out a Delphi study to set a checklist based on 
consensus agreement from leading experts in the field. Panelists (n = 24) 
representing the areas of sport science (n = 8; 33%), physiology (n = 7; 29%), 
physiotherapy (n = 3; 13%) and medicine (n = 6; 25%), from 13 different 
countries completed the Delphi process. An initial list of 16 points was 
proposed which was rated and commented on by panelists in three rounds of 
anonymous surveys following a standard Delphi procedure. The panel reached 
consensus on 15 items which encompassed the participants' demographic 
information, camera/room or environment setup and recording/analysis of tsk 
using IRT. The results of the Delphi produced the checklist entitled 
"Thermographic Imaging in Sports and Exercise Medicine (TISEM)" which is a 
proposal to standardize the collection and analysis of tsk data using IRT. It is 
intended that the TISEM can also be applied to evaluate bias in thermographic 
studies and to guide practitioners in the use of this technique.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtherbio.2017.07.006
PMID: 29037377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]