1. J Strength Cond Res. 2002 Nov;16(4):539-46.

A comparative electromyographical investigation of muscle utilization patterns 
using various hand positions during the lat pull-down.

Signorile JF(1), Zink AJ, Szwed SP.

Author information:
(1)Human Performance Laboratory, Department of Exercise and Sport Sciences, 
University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida 33124, USA.

This study aimed at investigating the effects of different hand positions on the 
electromyographic (EMG) activity of shoulder muscles during the performance of 
the lat pull-down exercise. Ten healthy men performed 3 repetitions of the lat 
pull-down exercise using their experimentally determined 10RM (repetition 
maximum) weight. Four different common variations of the lat pull-down were 
used: close grip (CG), supinated grip (SG), wide grip anterior (WGA), and wide 
grip posterior (WGP). Normalized root mean square of the EMG (NrmsEMG) activity 
for the right posterior deltoid (PD), latissimus dorsi (LD), pectoralis major 
(PM), teres major (TM), and long head of the triceps (TLH) were recorded using 
surface electrodes and normalized using maximum voluntary contractions. Repeated 
measures analysis of variance for each muscle detected statistical differences 
(p < 0.05) in myoelectric activity among hand positions during both the 
concentric and eccentric phases of the exercise. During the concentric phase, 
NrmsEMG results for the LD included WGA > WGP, SG, CG. For the TLH: WGA > WGP, 
SG, CG and WGP > CG, SG. For the PD: CG, WGA, SG > WGP. For the PM: CG, WGA, SG 
> WGP. During the eccentric phase, the LD produced the following patterns: WGA > 
WGP, SG, CG and WGP > CG. The TLH pattern showed WGA > SG and CG. For the PD: CG 
> WGA, WGP. The results indicate that changes in handgrip position affect the 
activities of specific muscles during the lat pull-down movement. Also, 
performance of the lat pull-down exercise using the WGA hand position produces 
greater muscle activity in the LD than any other hand position during both the 
concentric or eccentric phases of the movement.

PMID: 12423182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]