1. J Hum Kinet. 2017 Aug 1;58:5-13. doi: 10.1515/hukin-2017-0068. eCollection
2017  Sep.

Electromyographical Comparison of a Traditional, Suspension Device, and Towel 
Pull-Up.

Snarr RL(1), Hallmark AV(2), Casey JC(3), Esco MR(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Health and Kinesiology, Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, 
GA USA.
(2)Department of Kinesiology, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL USA.
(3)Department of Exercise Science, LaGrange College, LaGrange, GA USA.

Strengthening muscles of the back may have various implications for improving 
functions of daily living, aiding in the transfer of power in throwing, and 
assist in injury prevention of the shoulder complex. While several versions of 
the pull-up exist, there is currently no literature comparing their differences. 
The purpose of this investigation was to compare the electromyographical 
activity of the latissimus dorsi, posterior deltoid, middle trapezius, and 
biceps brachii while performing three variations of the pull-up. 
Resistance-trained men and women (n =15, age = 24.87 ± 6.52 years) participated 
in this study by performing traditional pull-ups, suspension device pull-ups, 
and towel pull-ups in a randomized fashion. Each pull-up was performed for three 
repetitions with a 1.5 bi-acromial grip-width for each participant. Normalized 
(%MVC) electromyographical values were recorded for each muscle group during 
each pull-up variation. No significant differences existed within the latissimus 
dorsi, biceps brachii or posterior deltoid between any of the exercises. For the 
middle trapezius, towel pull-ups provided significantly lower muscle activity 
than the traditional pull-up, while no differences between suspension pull-ups 
and the other variations occurred. In conclusion, only one muscular difference 
existed between the exercise variations and all versions examined provided 
electromyographical values, determined by current literature, to invoke a 
sufficient stimulus to promote increases in muscle strength and hypertrophy. 
Although further research is needed, practitioners can be confident when 
programming any of the movement variations examined when attempting to elicit 
adaptations of muscular strength and hypertrophy.

DOI: 10.1515/hukin-2017-0068
PMCID: PMC5548150
PMID: 28828073