de Leva, P. (1996). Adjustments to Zatsiorsky-Seluyanov's segment inertia parameters.
Journal of Biomechanics, 29(9), 1223-1230.

ABSTRACT (as printed in the paper; full text saved in
papers/deleva1996-adjustments-zatsiorsky-seluyanov.pdf, text extract in the .txt of the
same name):

Zatsiorsky et al. (in Contemporary Problems of Biomechanics, pp. 272-291, CRC Press,
Massachusetts, 1990a) obtained, by means of a gamma-ray scanning technique, the
relative body segment masses, center of mass (CM) positions, and radii of gyration for
samples of college-aged Caucasian males and females. Although these data are the only
available and comprehensive set of inertial parameters regarding young adult
Caucasians, they have been rarely utilized for biomechanical analyses of subjects
belonging to the same or a similar population. The main reason is probably that
Zatsiorsky et al. used bony landmarks as reference points for locating segment CMs and
defining segment lengths. Some of these landmarks were markedly distant from the joint
centers currently used by most researchers as reference points. The purpose of this
study was to adjust the mean relative CM positions and radii of gyration reported by
Zatsiorsky et al., in order to reference them to the joint centers or other commonly used
landmarks, rather than the original landmarks. The adjustments were based on a number
of carefully selected sources of anthropometric data.

RELEVANCE TO THIS PROJECT: this is the primary source for per-segment mass
fraction, longitudinal segment length (mm, for a reference female of 61.9 kg/1735 mm
and male of 73.0 kg/1741 mm), CM position (% of segment length from a stated
proximal/cranial endpoint), and three-axis (sagittal/transverse/longitudinal) radius of
gyration (% of segment length), for Head, Trunk (and its Upper/Middle/Lower parts),
Upper arm, Forearm, Hand, Thigh, Shank and Foot -- Table 4 of the paper, transcribed in
full in data/02-segment-parameters.csv. Used to scale a ~30 cm, N-segment marionette
figure and to place each segment's center of mass and rotational inertia in MuJoCo body
definitions.
